WRITING WORKPLACE CULTURES
WRITING
WORKPLACE
CULTURES
An Archaeology of Professional Writing




Jim Henry




Southern Illinois University Press
Carbondale and Edwardsville
Copyright © 2000 by the Board of Trustees,
Southern Illinois University
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
03 02 01 00 4 3 2 1

                  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Henry, Jim, 1952–
    Writing workplace cultures : an archaeology of professional writing / Jim Henry.
         p. cm.
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
    1. English language—Rhetoric—Study and teaching. 2. English language—
 Technical English—Research. 3. English language—Business English—Research.
 4. English language—Rhetoric—Research. 5. Technical writing—Research. 6. Business
 writing—Research. I. Title.
 PE1404 .H398 2000
 808'.042'07—dc21                                                     99-088861
 ISBN 0-8093-2320-6 (cloth : alk. paper)                                    CIP

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National
Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials,
ANSI Z39.48-1992. ∞
For Jim and Thelma,
my first teachers
CONTENTS


Preface ix


Introduction: Changing Modes of Composition 1


Part One. Writers in Theories and Practices (Mapping the Dig)
    1. RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF 15
          Reading Writers Narratologically 19
          Exploring Discursive Selves Beyond Academic Borders 22
   2. WHAT IS A WRITER? 29
         Profiles of Professional Writers 34
         What Will Writers Be? 43

Part Two. Research on Discursive Work in Organizational Settings (Uncovering Shards)
   3. IN FIELDWORKPLACES: RESEARCHERS’ SITES OF STUDY 49
          Writers’ Work and Positions in Private Businesses and
               Corporations 54
          Writers’ Work and Positions in Government Agencies and
               Institutions 57
          Writers’ Work and Positions in Professional Associations
               and Societies 60
          Writers’ Work and Positions in Educational and Nonprofit
               Institutions 62
          Writers’ Work, Fieldwork, and Subjective Work Identities: Syntheses
             from Shards 64
   4. ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES 69
          Dynamics Between the Individual and the Organization 72
          Dynamics of Collective Procedures and Writing 78
          Organizational Goals 86


                                                                                   vii
viii      CONTENTS

             From Organization Charts to Discursive Digs: Imagining New Unities in
                  Subjective Work Lives 88
       5. DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES 91
              Discourse Forms 94
             Discourse Effects 102
             Taking Inventory 106


Part Three. Implications and Applications (Links to Other Shards, Other Sites)
       6. REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY 111
             The Content(s) of Postmodern Composing 114
             Melding Composition with Discourse Studies 120
             Designing Professional Writing Curricula 127
             Pondering Discursive Shards and Imagining New Writing Vessels 136
       7. REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE 139
             Representing Authorship 142
             Representing the Domain of Professional Authorship 146
             Representing Writers’ Expertise 149
             Representing Writing’s Interests 158
       8. INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION 161
              Discursive Sites of Intervention 165
             Organizational Sites of Intervention 172
             Reforming Discursive Formations and Recapturing
                   Intellectual Dominion 179


Appendixes
   A. Researchers’ Professional Writing Backgrounds 187
       B. Researchers’ Topics in Self-Assessment as Writers, Sites of Research,
              and Research Topics and Themes 189
       C. Writers’ Work and Positions by Nature of the Organization 211
       D. Researchers’ Abstracts of Workplace Ethnographies 221


Works Cited 247


Index 255
                                                                         ix




PREFACE


In the twentieth-century United States, writing in the workplace and
writing in academic settings coevolved perniciously. In the high-vol-
ume production workplace of the early century, writing requirements
at most levels of organizational pyramids were relatively simple: work-
ers had to interpret executive commands, enact them properly, and
report on this execution. Writing instruction in the academy, at most
institutions, followed the so-called Harvard model: students produced
demonstration essays or research papers, usually on a belletristic topic
(because English departments had staked claim to writing instruction
in a student’s “general education”), elaborated in the hermetic envi-
ronment of a classroom, to be submitted to one instructor as the sole
arbiter of their worth. Because this worth was most often based on
formal qualities of communication, academic writing instruction fur-
nished the workplace with writers adapted to the relatively simple
writing tasks demanded of them by the high-volume economy.
     Pernicious was the reduction of writing to something akin to com-
municative packaging, as most students learned it and as most work-
ers exercised it. The educational philosophy driving this model was that
of liberal humanism, which held that writing about belletristic authors
would improve people morally and aesthetically, perhaps endowing
them with the wherewithal to oppose workplace realities found to be
insalubrious. (In theory, graduates of Harvard and similar institutions,
who would occupy the top levels of organizational pyramids, would
thus feel a moral obligation to improve life in the workplace.) The real-
ity for most workers was that the discursive environment of most job
settings offered little possibility for critique, opposition, or even inno-
vation because the very understanding of writing as produced by com-
position epistemology was so thin. The organizational purview of most
people writing in the workplace, moreover, was so restricted by high-
volume structures and practices that they would not have been able


                                                                         ix
x    PREFACE


to muster a broader scope for their writing even if composition instruc-
tion had provided them with fuller understandings of it.
     In the last three decades of the century, a sea change took place.
In the academy, the shift to “process pedagogy” in composition instruc-
tion opened the door for fuller understandings of writing and for richer
development of writers’ (and writing’s) potential. Theories of “subjec-
tivity” as shaped by discourse also advanced understanding of writ-
ing dramatically: social constructionist theory states that realities are
shaped by the language practices undergirding them, and postmodern
theories of discourse hold that discourse is the very material from which
realities take form. Theoretically, with each new entry into discourse,
with each foray into a genre, with each word on the screen, writers
inscribe cultures and shape their own psychological realities. These new
understandings of discourse not only acknowledged the power of
writing to shape individual subjectivity, they also implored inquiry into
the interrelationships of writing with power and of writing with value.
Yet here the perniciousness endured, because writing instruction re-
mained under the dominion of English departments and subject to a
paradigm that reproduced the discursive status quo: students contin-
ued to produce singly authored display essays on belletristic topics in
a hermetic classroom, to be judged by one instructor—an apt surro-
gate for a future manager in a high-volume mode of production.
     The high-volume mode of production, however, had dissipated
with the sea change. The nation had entered a high-value mode of
production, which meant that organizations with pyramidal structures
would lose their competitive edge through sheer lack of brain power
in decision making, problem solving, and solution brokering (thou-
sands of heads are better than one). The personal computer also fig-
ured in this sea change, because workers’ engagement with discursive
processes and products in the workplace could now be configured in
dramatically new ways that would enable a realization of the poten-
tial of writing and of discourse in the lives of workers and in the lives
of organizations. Yet the perniciousness endured, wrought on the one
hand by workplace executives’ failure to realize the potential of writ-
ing for organizations in the information age and on the other hand by
the academy’s relentless shaping of learning forums and of writing
instruction to reproduce the status quo—despite purported opposition
to the status quo among most faculty.
     The time is ripe to turn the lenses of discourse theory to workplace
writing, long denied such attention because of its seeming transpar-
                                                              PREFACE   xi


ency and its “instrumental” functions. Some of this work has already
begun, primarily by researchers in technical and scientific writing, but
circumspection endures on both sides of the ivory walls: workplace
writers and managers often deem academic theory too removed from
the exigencies of everyday work life, and academics often see the work-
place as either too mundane or too exploitative to merit their atten-
tion or collaboration. This book addresses both audiences with the
promise that their understanding of workplace writing practices and
articulations with broader discourse processes can benefit from its read-
ing. Academics in general and compositionists in particular can enrich
their understanding of the writing subject’s formation in workplace
cultures, the better to reshape writing instruction, writing research, and
writing philosophies. Workplace executives and managers can glean
ways to restructure and reconceptualize writing to generate greater
value for their organizations, for workers, and for the larger cultures
that use their services and products. Workplace writers and students
can discern ways to elaborate their writing practices and broaden their
discursive knowledge.
     As a source book for such an array of readers, Writing Workplace
Cultures: An Archaeology of Professional Writing covers much ground.
From 1993 to 1999, practicing professional writers (and aspiring writ-
ers) composed workplace ethnographies of writing as part of a gradu-
ate course I designed, Cultures of Professional Writing. These research-
ers received instruction in ethnographic theory and methodology, field-
work methodology, and cultural analysis. Using a workshop format,
they produced analyses of discursive processes and products in work-
place cultures. They also agreed to serve as my subjects in teacher-re-
search on writers’ subjectivities as shaped by the discourses of the work-
place and the academy. Their work and my analysis of it form the foun-
dation of this book.
     As a teacher-researcher committed to an informed intersubjective
methodology in which my students would devise their own research
questions and topics and in which I would share my ongoing analyses
of their work, I struggled to develop adequate representations of what
they had done. Aware of recent ethnographic thought that lobbies for
constant reflection on the politics and poetics of representation, striv-
ing to enact postmodern tenets that call us to resist totalizing accounts
of any cultural trends or practices, I sought a way both to highlight
the petits recits that these researchers provided and to represent their
work in ways useful to them, their teachers, and their workplace col-
xii   PREFACE


leagues. My solution has been to conceptualize this book as an archae-
ology, in which researchers’ findings and researchers’ self-representa-
tions figure as so many shards to be scrutinized by readers according
to their own theoretical frames and local contexts. To this end, re-
searchers and their research are represented from various perspectives
and in various dimensions, aided by tables in the appendixes summa-
rizing the researchers’ backgrounds, their sites of research, writers’ or-
ganizational positions, and their kinds of work. Researchers’ abstracts,
which represent both findings on local discourse practices and research-
ers’ positions with respect to those practices, are also included to sup-
port heuristic readings.
     The introduction expands my above comments on the coevolution
of academic and workplace writing in the century with a particular
eye to composition theory and practice, emphasizing the potential of
social constructionist theory and poststructural understanding of lan-
guage practices for reconfiguring writing practices in the workplace
and the academy. The value of exploring subjectivity in everyday work-
place discourse practices is emphasized, and the theoretical connections
with Michel Foucault’s work in The Archaeology of Knowledge are
set forth. The rest of the book then is organized into three parts.
     Part one, “Writers in Theories (Mapping the Dig),” opens with
chapter 1, “Researching the Discursive Self.” This chapter summarizes
some recent research in composition studies on the new “subject” of
composition and lays out a narratological framework for analyzing sub-
ject formation within discourses; sample “shards” are considered for
the light they shed on subjectivity. Chapter 2, “What Is a Writer?”
opens the Foucauldian framework for understanding subject positions
in discourse and presents the eighty-four researchers represented in this
book, all the while delineating cultural forces that deny these research-
ers full enjoyment of the status of “writer” even though they write full-
time. Appendixes A and B support readings of this chapter with data
on researchers’ self-representations as writers.
     Part two, “Research on Discursive Work in Organizational Settings
(Uncovering Shards),” presents much of the documentation for the
claims made in this book. Chapter 3, “In Fieldworkplaces: Research-
ers’ Sites of Study,” discusses the various sites of study and writers’
work in these sites, by category of organization, all the while making
the case for construing all professional writing sites simultaneously as
sites of fieldwork. Appendix C, “Writers’ Work and Positions by
Nature of the Organization,” supports readings of this chapter. Chapter
                                                            PREFACE   xiii


4, “Organizational Features of Workplace Writing Cultures,” presents
features of writing identified by researchers over all seven years and
draws syntheses across these features. Chapter 5, “Discursive Features
of Workplace Writing Cultures,” provides a similar development of
discursive features as identified by researchers. Chapters 4 and 5 pre-
sent numerous lists of specific organizational and discursive structures
and practices, providing additional shards for readers’ uses.
     Part three, “Implications and Applications (Links to Other Shards,
Other Sites),” prompts heuristic thinking, too, as it draws implications
for the academy, the workplace, and collaborators on knowledge pro-
duction in both. Chapter 6, “Representing Discursive Work in the
Academy,” posits discourse studies as a means of re-presenting writ-
ing instruction to colleagues in the academy, the aim being to recon-
figure composition epistemologies and practices in light of this archae-
ology and recent composition thinking. Chapter 7, “Representing
Discursive Work in the Workplace,” posits a domain of professional
authorship as writers’ workplace realms, in which they manage multi-
authored documents with an eye to local cultural norms and values,
contributors, end users, and our larger culture. Chapter 8, “Interven-
ing in Cultural Production and Reproduction,” situates the work of
the researchers in this book within the ideological context of Wash-
ington, D.C., and makes the case for collaboration among academics
and workplace writers to identify and promote measures to add value
to workers’ lives and to the organization’s life.

Obviously, this project has entailed a lot of collaboration among many
people. My thanks go first and foremost to the eighty-four graduate
students who composed ethnographic analyses of workplace cultures
as the basis for this book. They appear throughout the book under
pseudonyms, and so I shall not name them here. Their analyses were
aided greatly by my colleagues who have visited our course each spring
to probe the topic of cultural analysis from a variety of perspectives.
Since the inception of the project, the following colleagues have vis-
ited at least one class session: Debra Bergoffen, philosophy/women’s
studies; Zofia Burr, women’s studies/cultural studies/creative writing;
Pat Caretta, career services; Dulce Cruz, composition studies/Latina/
o studies; Joel Foreman, English/social and organizational learning;
Cindy Fuchs, film and media studies/cultural studies/English; Ted
Gessner, organizational psychology; Robert Holt, organizational psy-
chology; Kara Incalcatera, organizational psychology; Roger Lancaster,
xiv   PREFACE


anthropology/cultural studies; Marilyn Mobley McKenzie, African-
American studies/English; Tom Moylan, cultural studies/English; John
O’Connor, English/computers and composition; William Rifkin, so-
cial and organizational learning; Michelle Smith-Bermiss, African-
American studies/English; Beverly Stennett, career services; Susan Tren-
cher, anthropology; Margaret “Peggy” Yocom, folklore/English/
cultural studies. My colleagues in the English Department at George
Mason University have provided support and encouragement through-
out the project; Chris Thaiss and Terry Zawacki in particular have
aided me through critical response to chapter drafts. Two anonymous
reviewers for Southern Illinois University Press also provided valuable
critiques. Finally, Meg Moss aided me with the graphic design of the
figures in the book.
                             xv




WRITING WORKPLACE CULTURES
INTRODUCTION:
CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION

        Modes of composition have changed because the discipline’s
        research agenda has shifted from the search for structures to
        theories of practice that explore the interplay of both structure
        and agency.
                                     —Renato Rosaldo, Culture and Truth


The discipline Renato Rosaldo refers to is anthropology. As one of the
contributors to James Clifford and George Marcus’s widely referenced
Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, Rosaldo
helped usher in an era of reflexivity in ethnographic writing. To achieve
this reflexivity, ethnographers have turned their scrutiny to the ways
and means of textual representation of cultures, to the “poetics and
politics” of ethnographic work and ethnographic products. The work
of the ethnographer no longer consists of composing a written account
that pretends to mirror flawlessly a local reality, in which members of
the culture are cast as types and the researcher as an instrument of sci-
ence—objectivity personified. In the postmodern scene, all composi-
tion is contingent, all composers politically and discursively positioned.
     The shift in research agenda that Rosaldo describes applies to many
disciplines in the postmodern academy, in particular to those in the
humanities and social sciences. Much of the deconstructive work of
the 1980s and 1990s has enabled fuller understandings of the ways in
which structures identified through earlier “objective” research were
inevitably also products of the research frame and researchers’ meth-
ods (and thus always partial), leading researchers in many fields to fo-
cus their efforts not on further reifying structures but on examining
practices within and against them. With the increased complexity of
cultural practices resulting from the shifts in national economic and
social structures, changes in organizational structures, and the sheer
volume of information moving among these structures in the informa-

                                                                            1
2    INTRODUCTION


tion age, questions of agency have assumed centrality in postmodern
research. For researchers and for researched subjects entering a new cen-
tury, many postmodern theoretical tenets have become a part of daily
life. Witness the fragmentation of cultural unities believed to be nearly
immutable (e.g., job security in certain organizations earlier allied with
purported national interests), blurred boundaries among domains of
life (in particular, those of work and leisure), hyperacceleration of
cultural processes (through digitized information, its networked flows,
and its Web dissemination), and a pastiche of synchronic representa-
tions of realities supplanting the more linear and hierarchical (most
notably in mass media). Discerning agency as practiced among struc-
tures in this scene looms a task as vital as it is challenging.
     Composition has been one of the many fields to rise to this chal-
lenge. In the 1970s the shift in research focus from students’ written
products to their writing processes (framed then for the most part as
cognitive processes) prepared the ground for the ensuing shift in the
1980s to a focus on writing contexts (mostly academic classrooms).
This in turn opened the way for some researchers to focus on agency
as circumscribed by cultural and discursive practices. Susan Miller, for
example, proposed “disclosing connections between specific social and
textual superstructures and highlighting how writing situations con-
struct their participant writers before, during, and after they under-
take any piece of writing” (198), and Lester Faigley suggested that
students be invited to explore “how agency can be constructed from
multiple subject positions” (224).
     Undeniably, one of composition’s most endearing traits is its reso-
lute and persistent connection to teaching practices, as indicated by
the comments of Miller and Faigley. Yet the history of teaching com-
position in American postsecondary institutions has grossly under-
mined the potential of inquiry by composition researchers or by writ-
ers themselves into their agencies and subject positions. James Berlin’s
comprehensive history of twentieth-century postsecondary writing in-
struction in the United States traces the dominance of “current-tradi-
tional” rhetoric, which “makes the patterns of arrangement and su-
perficial correctness the main ends of writing instruction” (Rhetoric
and Reality 9). Sharon Crowley extends the critique, noting shortcom-
ings of such instruction in the realms of purpose and audience as well
as the narrow range of subject positions offered to writers:
    In current-traditional pedagogy, students’ papers are not constructed as
    messages that might command assent or rejection. Nor do current-tradi-
                                            CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION     3


    tional teachers constitute an audience in any rhetorical sense of that word,
    since they read not to learn or be amused or persuaded but to weigh and
    measure a paper’s adherence to formal standards. Hence the current-tra-
    ditional theory of discourse is not a rhetoric but a theory of graphic dis-
    play, and so it perfectly met the humanist requirement that students’ ex-
    pression of character be put under constant surveillance so that they could
    be “improved” by correction. (Composition 96)

     Such instruction has dominated curricula since the turn of the cen-
tury, when the so-called Harvard model grounded in current-traditional
rhetoric and spearheaded by Francis Child gained enormous influence
among curriculum designers at many institutions across the country,
leading them to conceptualize composition as he had: an endeavor con-
sisting of mastering forms, engaging little disciplinary content knowl-
edge (Russell 50). The research paper had earlier emerged as a form
of writing quite valuable in initiating new members into their chosen
realms of discursive work, yet this component of writing instruction
had been in its turn sapped of relevance through curricular reforms at
the time. As Donald Stewart notes, early-twentieth-century curriculum
reforms witnessed writing instruction wrested away from departments
of rhetoric (many in demise) by English departments concerned pri-
marily with the belles lettres. Student composers who might earlier have
pondered the discursive “I” as it assumed membership in a discipline
while researching topics valued by the discipline and dear to their own
concerns now were faced with researching topics in literature, like it
or not. Whether justified through current-traditional rhetoric’s tenet
that composition’s focus should be primarily formal or through lib-
eral humanism’s belief that the values gained through the study of lit-
erature automatically took priority over values that might be nurtured
through other discursive work, the end result was that studying com-
posers through the years—at least until the resurgence of disciplinary
writing courses in the 1980s—rarely got the chance to compose posi-
tions (and selves) in the discursive realms of their future active lives.
Coincident with the loss of this written discursive eperience, notes
William Riley Parker, was the loss of parallel spoken discursive expe-
rience, since composition instruction focusing on literature lacked the
oratorical component found earlier in departments of rhetoric (349).
     David Russell observes another important effect of the reconfig-
uring of research writing when taken over by English departments
devoted to belletristic pursuits: “Its pedagogical uses narrowed, mov-
ing from apprenticeship to production” (89). That is, composers not
4    INTRODUCTION


only were deprived of discursive subject positions in their future ac-
tive realms but were in the process positioned primarily to produce.
This shift eerily presaged the Taylorization of American industry in the
early 1900s. Spearheaded by the studies of Frederick W. Taylor in The
Principles of Scientific Management, factories reorganized work pro-
cesses for greater efficiency, using time-motion studies to maximize (and
standardize) workers’ movements. Taylorization of the workplace was
linked strongly to “social efficiency” models of teaching all subjects
(and students) at the K–12 levels, as discussed by Herbert M. Kliebard
in The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1893–1958. He observes
the links between Taylorization of the workplace and of curricula:
“Once the standardization of the techniques of production were
achieved, the task of bringing the average worker up to the required
level of work could be accomplished” (95). Schooling, too, could be
Taylorized to prepare workers efficiently (albeit at individuals’ discur-
sive experiential expense). Composition instruction achieved this not
only through current-traditional epistemology that divorced instruc-
tion from composers’ genuine concerns (and that rendered writers and
future workers more easily quantifiable via a theory of graphic display)
but also through generic writing assignments and conventions that
dramatically limited first-person discourse (which, once again, would
have been unthinkable in a department of rhetoric). Finally, composi-
tion courses in this age were invariably structured around books, which,
although on the one hand opened new horizons for readers, on the
other limited those horizons in their own way through the codex cul-
ture they carried with them (Lanham), a culture that values literacy
over orality and that has in fact imposed literate interpretive lenses on
preliterate cultural phenomena.
    This dramatic reduction in the dimensions that any discursive “I”
might assume in writing courses dovetailed with shifts in business re-
structuring occurring at the same time. Following JoAnne Yates, Russell
observes:

    In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, American business
    reorganized human relationships through the new movement toward sys-
    tematic management, a movement that depended upon impersonal writ-
    ten communication to subordinate the individual to a rationalized sys-
    tem. (103)

The impersonal written communication needed for the rationalization
of management systems was effectively assured by the ideological form
                                         CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION   5


that composition instruction had taken, to be reinforced through the
formalist theories underpinning textual interpretations of belletristic
texts (and compositions about them) by midcentury, which will be
taken up in chapter 2. For the moment, this brief history of composi-
tion serves to underscore the economic and ideological reasons for its
modes in the modernist era.
     That era was one of unprecedented U.S. economic prosperity, made
possible not only by the Taylorization of workplaces and systematic
management but also by the development of high-volume production
in the industrial sector by the nation’s core corporations. Says Robert
Reich: “By the 1950s, the well-being of individual citizens, the pros-
perity of the nation, and the success of the nation’s core corporations
seemed inextricably connected” (43). The structure of these corpora-
tions at the core of the high-volume economy was one of absolute
control: “Organizational charts graphically mapped out internal hi-
erarchies, starting with a large box at the top containing the chief ex-
ecutive officer, and proceeding downward through levels of ever smaller
and more abundant boxes” (51). Literacy demands of most workers
were principally those of interpreting executive orders correctly and
implementing them efficiently within the hierarchy. Says Yates: “Im-
personal policies, procedures, processes, and orders flowed down the
hierarchy; information to serve as the basis for analysis flowed up the
hierarchy” (20). Expertise in writing required primarily a mastery in
generating and interpreting impersonal written communication to the
ends of executive efficiency, and perhaps because the middle class per-
ceived its interests as so closely intertwined with those of big business,
impetus for reconceptualizing college writing instruction for greater
individual actualization was hardly forthcoming from the workplace
experience. Thus macroeconomic organization of subjectivities joined
that of curricular philosophy and institutional competition among dis-
ciplines to assure that composition instruction would replicate status
quo discursive experience.
     By the time the research agenda in composition had shifted, with
many other fields, to theories of practice exploring interplays of struc-
ture and agency, the nation’s economy had effectively shifted from high-
volume production to high-value production. In the high-value enter-
prise, says Reich, “profits derive not from scale and volume but from
continuous discovery of new linkages between solutions and needs”
(85). Workers’ literacies in such an economy, clearly, must go beyond
the functionary practices of yore. The forms that workplace literacies
6    INTRODUCTION


will take remain to be seen, but even in this initial phase of reconsid-
ering composition research and instruction, prior research in the field
speaks to macroeconomic realities. Writing, as Janet Emig demon-
strated in 1977, is more than a neutral medium of communication for
preestablished knowledge. It is a mode of learning, which, when prop-
erly conceptualized and contextualized in local workplace cultures, can
contribute to discoveries of new linkages between solutions and needs,
at the very least.
     Such a rethinking of writing’s potential within organizational life
is suggested by Shoshana Zuboff’s work, in which she analyzes the shift
from high-volume production (in what she calls the “automated” age)
to high-value production (in the “informated” age). Predicting new
shapes for organizations and new dissemination of information and
authority within them, she says that “when work becomes synonymous
with responsiveness to data, it engenders inquiry and dialogue, thus
opening the way for workers to envision new possibilities and fresh
alternatives to the reigning definitions of process, product, and orga-
nization” (302). “To put it simply,” she says, “learning is the new form
of labor” (395).
     What, though, will writers learn through workplace writing? What
should be their topics of inquiry and their modes of composition in
conducting it? What forms might curricula take to prepare them for
such inquiry? Because writing is not only a mode of learning but is in
fact the means by which realities become socially constructed—by
which local cultures create realities with effects far beyond their bor-
ders and reproduce the local realities of their organizations—writers
must at the very least hone their skills in perceiving the ways and means
of this social construction via language. And because writers not only
compose but are composed by the discourses of the workplace, recent
composition tenets tell us, they must hone skills in perceiving the mech-
anisms, dynamics, and effects of such composition. In the twenty-first
century, learning about, during, and through workplace writing must
embrace the interplay of organizational structures and agencies among
them in the ongoing composition of writers’ lived realities and the
realities that they write/create.
     This book supports such work. As the title suggests, part of this
project borrows from recent ethnographic theory that explores the
implications of the interpretive turn in the analysis of local cultures.
The Cultures of Professional Writing course attempted to enact field-
work methodologies linked to this new analysis, in this case on the part
                                         CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION   7


of practicing (or aspiring) professional writers and editors, who rep-
resent a class of professionals regularly tasked with composing as their
central workplace duty. As mentioned in the preface, during seven
consecutive springs, a total of eighty-four writers enrolled in an MA
program in professional writing and editing conducted ethnographic
analyses of workplace cultures in their organizational and discursive
dimensions. While participating in course work, they also agreed to
serve as my research subjects under the university’s sponsored programs
of research, following the guidelines of the Belmont Report. Our course
thus became the site of “informed intersubjective research” (McBeth),
in which all class discussions and individual conferences were audio-
taped and all writings were photocopied or electronically stored. Stu-
dents in the class had the option of not participating in my research
(only one student chose this option), and grades were based solely on
material production and regular, engaged participation, so that course
participants would not feel coerced either to participate in research or
to conform to a particular stance in their writing. (To see the current
syllabus, go to http://mason.gmu.edu/~jhenry/612syl.htm.)
     The course design was inspired by Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami’s
Writing in Nonacademic Settings, the groundbreaking text presenting
studies of writing in workplace cultures by various academic research-
ers (mostly from rhetoric and composition). This text set the stage for
a number of ethnographic studies of workplace writing, leading Carl
Herndl in 1993 to voice this caveat: “This research lends itself to a
mode of reporting that reproduces the dominant discourse of its re-
search site and spends relatively little energy analyzing the modes and
possibilities for dissent, resistance, and revision” (349). From the first
Cultures of Professional Writing class meeting in 1993, I have empha-
sized the value of dissent, resistance, and critique to writers studying
their careers, since such critique could afford them insights that would
strengthen their writing prowess. As it turned out, of the eighty-four
participants in this research, sixty-five chose to study their own places
of work, and they required no prompting to mount critiques.
     My research design was inspired initially by Dixie Goswami and
Peter Stillman’s Reclaiming the Classroom: Teacher Research as an
Agency for Change, in which they present examples of classroom in-
structors conducting research collaboratively with their students to
improve curricula and teaching practices. James Berlin has observed
that “the teacher-as-researcher program in writing emphasizes the
study of the unique language practices of students in their particular
8    INTRODUCTION


social setting” (“Teacher” 10), and I sought through my research de-
sign to focus students’ attention on the unique language practices of
their workplace social settings. Because the course’s workshop format
enabled frequent reporting by participants on these language practices,
class sessions and research writing provided a forum for professional
writers to share their own insights on workplace cultures with other
professional writers.
     In this respect, my students’ ethnographic project differed signifi-
cantly from that of contributors to Writing Culture and to the femi-
nist volume Women Writing Culture that stands as a valuable episte-
mological update on the earlier work. Debts to each of these volumes
will be repaid in later chapters; I mention them here to signal a sig-
nificant difference in this book: unlike the academic ethnographer-
theorists inspecting representative practices and addressing commen-
tary on them to their peers in the academy, the researchers represented
in this book were more concerned with inspecting the “instrumental”
discourses of the workplaces in which they daily composed (and were
composed) and in interpreting local cultures to inform their under-
standings of these compositions. Thus their aims were quite different,
as were their audiences. I see their project as no less vital than that of
their Ph.D. counterparts, even though their familiarity with ethnogra-
phy and hence theoretical sophistication is less, because the research-
ers in this book have taken as their object of analysis a topic at the very
heart of social constructionism itself: the composing through language
practices of everyday realities. Professional writers daily compose and
recompose the cultures of their workplaces however subtly through
their discursive projects. Focusing on this aspect of composing through
ethnographic analysis can illuminate the ways in which so-called in-
strumental discourses also constitute a cultural poesis, a “constant
reconstitution of selves and others through specific exclusions, con-
ventions, and discursive practices” (Clifford 24). That these research-
ers were often members of the cultures they researched also holds in-
triguing possibilities for intervention, which has been a key element of
both applied anthropology and feminist practices for years. These pos-
sibilities are discussed at length in part three of the book.
     Just as the title Writing Workplace Cultures signals this book’s
connections with ethnographic analysis, so does the subtitle An Archae-
ology of Professional Writing signal connections with Michel Fou-
cault’s work in The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on
Language. He uses the term archaeology to indicate “a possible line
                                          CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION    9


of attack for the analysis of verbal performances” (206), these perfor-
mances being construed not as utterances by individuals but as “discur-
sive events.” An endeavor in the history of ideas, his work entails a
revision of historical interpretive approaches by revisiting certain sites
of discourse (for example, that of mid-nineteenth-century medicine)
to piece together the findings in that site, not so much in the interest
of confirming hypotheses about a previous reality as to discern rules
of practice underpinning it. Hence his choice of the extended metaphor
of archaeology. My use of the term signals both Foucault’s conceptual
frames as they will inform some of my analysis of professional writ-
ing and the procedures through which this analysis is made possible.
     Archaeological work is initially exploratory and then synthetic. In
the exploratory phase, one slices through earth gingerly, methodically,
alert for any colors or textures that contrast with the ground. When I
worked as an archaeologist’s assistant in the 1970s on a prehistoric
site, we would skim off the soil, layer by layer, until a fleck of ivory or
burnt sienna appeared. Then we would drop our shovels and take up
dental picks, prying earth away from the color in the hope that more
color would appear, producing a form. The ivory might be a tip of a
finger or a hip or a knee, and our work consisted of uncovering the
color in whatever direction it would take us, bones hardening in the
air and leading us on eventually to expose the full body, which, de-
pending upon how much the earth had shifted since burial, might lie
at nearly any angle. In the case of burnt sienna, we would pick at it
gently in the hope of retrieving a vessel fully intact, but such was rarely
the case. Rather, we would salvage one shard here, another there, col-
lecting as many as possible that seemed likely to belong to the same
vessel, whereupon the synthetic work began: as logic and imagination
suggested, we would piece together these shards to arrive at a repre-
sentation of what might have been the earlier unity.
     Foucault’s archaeological work in the territory of discourses was
similar in its procedures, though somewhat different in its aims. Phi-
losopher Debra Bergoffen describes it as follows:

    I’m down there and I’m digging and I come upon these shards. I say: What
    do they make? How do these pieces fit together? How are they related
    to each other? What sorts of objects emerge when I put them together in
    certain ways? Shards is all we got. And shards, that’s what Foucault is
    calling discourses. (in class, 5/1/96)

Part of Foucault’s project was discerning the ways in which various
10   INTRODUCTION


discourses and practices surrounding them came together in discursive
formations, offering positions to subjects who circulated in these for-
mations and among these discourses. The work of this book rejoins his
project and takes as its object of analysis not the historical uncovering
of nineteenth-century discourses but rather the contemporary uncov-
ering of twentieth- (and twenty-first-) century discourses in which pro-
fessional writers (and others) are offered positions. Because writers are
a class of professionals who regularly enact composition tenets as part
of their primary work, this archaeology serves as a resource both for
writers (and aspiring writers and writing managers) and for composi-
tionists who want to reshape our field in light of these findings.
     As I mentioned in the preface, this archaeology is aided by research-
ers’ abstracts (appendix D) and by three large tables (appendixes A,
B, and C). Using these tables along with the abstracts and index, readers
can chart readings through the book according to their own interests
or local circumstances by following a particular theme or researcher
through each appearance and by comparing themes and researchers
with others in a table or specific table cell. Though I draw syntheses
and analyses for each table at various moments, part of the lure of an
archaeological site is the similarities one perceives with shards in one’s
own dig.
     Like an archaeological museum containing vessels from many sites,
this book is dense with information, so that linear, word-by-word read-
ings cannot correspond with any one reader’s desires. Hence I have used
numerous headings in part two, for example, which enable readers to
glean a trend or pattern among research issues at a glance—then to
consult the detailed bulleted lists as deemed pertinent. The tables may
appear dense at first brush, but they gain dimension in tandem with
my discussions and with the reading trajectories that readers bring to
them and continue through them. (Readers who would like to ponder
the shards of this archaeology in a hypertext excavation can do so at
http://classweb.gmu.edu/classweb/jhenry/index.html.) In Envisioning
Information, Edward R. Tufte observes that “high-density design also
allows viewers to select, to narrate, to recast and personalize data for
their own uses” (50), and my hope is that readers will indeed be able
to do just that. When I began work on this project, I sought in my
analysis to mount some “meta-ethnographic” commentary that would
subsume course participants’ work in encompassing narratives, but this
attempt proved unfulfilling in its reductionism. Grappling with the
politics and poetics of representation, concurring with Jean-François
                                         CHANGING MODES OF COMPOSITION   11


Lyotard’s strategy for countering master narratives through localized
petits recits, I have come to agree with James E. Porter and Patricia
Sullivan, who in their discussion of methodological interfaces in pro-
fessional writing research, say: “The kind of theorizing we are advo-
cating is postmodern in the sense that the maps we draw are not meta-
maps, but rather heuristic ones” (319). I urge readers to view the many
tables, researchers’ abstracts, and indexes linking them as heuristic
maps to aid them in charting their own projects, and I take satisfac-
tion that these fragmented representations of my “research subjects”
resist any totalizing accounts.
     When I worked as a technical writer in the railroad industry, I
not only began to realize how academic institutional structures and
ideological practices had grossly undertheorized instrumental dis-
course, I also learned how valuable and complex the seemingly trans-
parent concepts of readability and usability could be. I have tried to
apply these concepts in this book, imagining my readers to be profes-
sional writers (or aspiring writers), workplace managers, writing teach-
ers, curriculum designers, professional writing scholars, and compo-
sitionists, and assuming that many readers will fall into more than one
of these categories. Readers at one extreme might deem this text too
academically esoteric, at the other extreme too preoccupied with mun-
dane discursive work. Yet these two extremes have every interest in
conversing, and composition studies has every interest in making the
conversation possible, as suggested by John Trimbur’s account of
postmodern composition: “By this postmodern version, composition
studies situates itself in a nondisciplinary or postdisciplinary place
where multiple, heterogeneous, and polyvalent discourses, projects, and
interests intersect” (136). This book uses one archaeological dig to
suggest some such intersections.
     In terms of usability, I imagine readers not only reading but con-
sulting this book, using it intermittently as a source for their own writ-
ing, course design, research, or debate. I imagine writers engaged in
workplace composing—weighing the pulls of tradition and culture,
disciplines and fields, the community, and their own values and expe-
riences—and agreeing with James E. Porter that “every composing
event is itself an ethical decision, not simply a presentation of an al-
ready preformed ethical position” (“Developing” 223). I imagine
writers and scholars collaborating in critical literacy projects, explor-
ing “how individuals are constituted as subjects outside educational
institutions” (Anderson and Irvine 87) and working together “to ad-
12   INTRODUCTION


dress the relationship between literacy and empowerment in a given
context” (91). I imagine readers in organizational cultures, concerned
along with former labor secretary Robert Reich that the “sense of con-
nectedness” between workers and national identity has disintegrated
and convinced that one way to reshape this connectedness—in ways
valuable not only to the nation but beyond it—is to examine the orga-
nizational and discursive structures and practices within local cultures
that have perhaps contributed to this disintegration.
    One central practice to explore is the structuring of authority. Zu-
boff depicts the ways in which authority moved out of workers’ pur-
views with the shift to Tayloristic forms of work organization in this
century. The parallel reduction of writers’ authority to the essentially
formal in composition theory and practice is too strong to ignore, and
this book begins the work of reconstructing writers’ discursive (and
hopefully organizational) authority as a part of authorship. Here the
notion of implied authorship proves invaluable, for within narrato-
logical theory every text has an implied author, defined by Gerald
Prince as the “implicit image of an author in the text, taken to be stand-
ing behind the scenes and to be responsible for its design and for the
values and cultural norms it adheres to” (Dictionary of Narratology
42). Writers in workplaces regularly compose these authors, and be-
cause they are part of a process that is responsible for values and cul-
tural norms, they will need theoretical and methodological support in
apprehending these cultural phenomena, and they will need epistemo-
logical support in lobbying for their rights in this authorship. As modes
of composing change with the digitization of information and work-
place restructuring in the twenty-first century, in fact, professional
writers and students of writing could prove invaluable collaborators
in rectifying misconceptions of what composition is. This book seeks
to join the efforts of many compositionists and professional writing
scholars over the past several years to achieve these ends.
PART ONE

Writers in Theories and Practices
(Mapping the Dig)
1   RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF

    In the Archaeology, the question “who is speaking?” actually
    serves to underscore the multiplicity of social forces impinging
    upon the self, forces that struggle against one another to enter
    discourse through the “I.” The subject always speaks from a
    “discontinuity,” from a point of intersection between divergent
    interests, channels, and communities.
               —Kurt Spellmeyer, “Foucault and the Freshman Writer:
                                     Considering the Self in Discourse”

    Anne: [To instructor] And the gap there between what you read
       and what you analyze, is making me as a writer very self-
       conscious as I write. And as I do this work.
    Nidean: Are you self-conscious when you write anything? Or
       just . . .
    Anne: Um—no—well, I’m taking a class in autobiography right
       now. And we share those pieces, and those are very personal
       pieces of writing. And those, I just let go and write. And if
       somebody doesn’t like it, or doesn’t understand it, I can sit
       there in the group and come back at him face to face—or
       her—anyway . . .
    Branden: Um, could I just make a comment? Because I don’t—I,
       I understand what you’re saying [to Anne]—but I don’t look
       at this like that. I, I thought this quote was really neat, in the
       Herndl article; he said that “Derrida is right when he says
       that the critical relationship that we establish with our own
       discourse is a measure of its quality and fecundity.” I mean,
       that’s—anyway—basically he’s—what I’m trying to get out of
       this is just sort of develop this critical viewpoint of what I’m
       doing, and do the best possible thing that I can do.
                                            —discussion in class, 3/23/93




                                                                            15
16   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES




While composition was emerging as a field of research on writing
processes in the 1970s and 1980s, continental theory was exerting enor-
mous influence in American academe, in the humanities in general and
in English in particular. Because much of this theory focused on dis-
course, discursive practices and traditions, discursive formations, and
the construction of the subject therein, literature scholars were able
to enhance interpretive frames brought to published texts. Many com-
position scholars found themselves positioned to use this theory in
dynamic ways, given that their primary material was the writing of stu-
dents, which made the authors of primary texts immediately available—
often in researchers’ own classrooms. Kurt Spellmeyer’s use of Foucaul-
dian theory to interpret freshman writing illustrates the parameters of
this research: the “self” in discourse represents social forces that find
their manifestations when one writes; the “I” is recognized as a sub-
ject of composition along with any claims that this “I” may predicate.
     The potential of such research is enormous. After all, a theory of
subjectivity as constructed in discourse links with diverse intellectual
realms, including politics, psychology, and philosophy at the very least.
In the realm of politics, for example, Althusser’s concept of the sub-
ject as interpellated by ideological state apparatuses reminds us that
our subjective identities are always shaped to a degree by the state and
its institutions, including surrogate institutions from the religious to
the educational that determine one subject’s relationship to another.
In the realm of psychology, Lacan’s extensions of Freudian theory that
posit a fundamental disunity in our psychologies, engendered in infancy
upon first realization that the self is discrete from the mother (and
coincident with language learning that permits acquiring the concepts
of self and other), help explain at least part of the difficulty of repre-
senting oneself in writing—of finding adequate words upon each re-
entry into discourse. In philosophy, Barthes’s now-famous “death of
the author” permitted a new approach to textual interpretation that
sought out recurrent semantic codes in literary works and the cultural
constructions imbuing each individual writer, and Foucault’s essay
                                          RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   17


“What Is an Author?” inspected the subjectivity of authorship in the
plane of sociological functions. Indeed, much of Foucault’s work has
enlarged the implications of social constructionism itself for under-
standing our daily subjectivities as lived among the myriad discourses
with which we contend.
     Compositionists, professional writing scholars and writers, and
workplace writers and managers can benefit from such theory by fo-
cusing it on actual workplace writing experiences, academic writing
experiences, and comparisons of the two. With respect to subjective
identities as shaped by the state and surrogate institutions, for example,
we might study the specific ways in which the structures and practices
of our academic institutions shape writing subjects’ relationships with
other subjects, and how these relationships compare with those of the
workplace. In what ways are writing subjects shaped as functionar-
ies, and in what ways as collaborators or apprentices? Through what
writing practices do we position subjects within institutions as core-
searchers gleaning new linkages between problems and solutions? How
can organizational structures and practices in academic and nonaca-
demic settings be revised to promote productive and satisfying rela-
tionships among subjects (acknowledging that the political inflection
of subjectivity is an ongoing discursive process) to the benefit of orga-
nizations and writers within them? Chapters 3, 4, and 5 offer shards
that might serve academics and workplace discourse managers in imag-
ining these revisions.
     Psychological subjectivities as shaped through language practices
have been addressed within many disciplines and from a variety of
perspectives. However, such research to date has focused overwhelm-
ingly on individual authorship, on manifestations of an essentialized
and unified self, most often composed in an expressive mode. Much
work lies ahead on gleaning the contours of discursive selves composed
in organizational settings via collaborative authorship, reviewing these
contours critically through varieties of theoretical lenses, and design-
ing new frameworks for understanding the interplay among discursive
selves and organizational practices, values, and products. As Dorothy
Winsor observes of workplace writing, “We must constitute ourselves
in texts that we do not wholly control” (194). Such constitution elic-
its complex psychological processes on writers’ parts, the study of which
could yield greater value for writers and their workplace cultures. In
chapter 2 appears a partial inventory of writers’ subjectivities in psy-
chological dimensions, and ensuing chapters demonstrate that even this
18   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


partial inventory displays aspects of subjectivity that are dramatically
truncated in most workplace writing. What steps might be taken by
discourse managers in the workplace and professional writing schol-
ars collaborating with them to enhance the structures and practices
shaping psychological subjectivities of workplace writers? This ques-
tion goes beyond the rhetorical, because “finding adequate words upon
each reentry into discourse” can yield value for organizations and in-
dividual writers alike.
     Researching the discursive self as shaped in academic and nonaca-
demic cultures can thus prove valuable to writers, their audiences, their
colleagues, and their managers—and to compositionists and profes-
sional writing scholars eager to understand better the practices and
structures undergirding composition of the self within workplace dis-
courses. One difficulty in accomplishing this research, however, is find-
ing frameworks for interpretation that enable one to capture the of-
ten momentary, ambiguous, and even contradictory manifestations of
subjectivity in the discourses encountered in academic and nonaca-
demic settings.
     In academic settings, part of this difficulty derives from the deficit
models that have framed interpretations of student writing for so many
years: because for decades academic essays have been approached as
demonstrations of incomplete proficiency to be corrected, it proves dif-
ficult to discern in our readings a subjectivity beyond that of neophyte
writer/learner. This difficulty has been compounded, ironically, by the
strong expressivist strand in composition epistemology during the
1970s and 1980s that often harkened to essentialist concepts of iden-
tity, grounded ultimately in Freudian psychological theory positing a
fundamentally unified self. Whereas such epistemology often helped
teachers reengage students as writers within academic discourses from
which they had become alienated, it simultaneously thwarted interpre-
tations that would enable student writers to perceive the many subjec-
tivities they assumed with each new essay, the many forces that struggle
against one another to enter discourse through the “I.”
     In nonacademic settings, researching the discursive self has rarely
been a project undertaken by organizations, despite the rapidly grow-
ing corpus of research by academics on workplace writing. This lack
of initiative surely stems from broadly held views of so-called instru-
mental writing as “authorless”—and hence devoid of discursive selves.
The topic of the discursive self, moreover, smacks of purely personal
issues that most workplaces would pass over in favor of research on
                                           RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   19


topics perceived as more pragmatic. Yet this book makes the case that
research on the discursive self can yield applications in the workplace
that, because of the theoretical richness underpinning them, could far
outstrip applications focused solely on discursive products or processes
with no eye to writers’ lives. Practicing writers, managers, and writ-
ing scholars must collaborate on this research to uncover more archaeo-
logical shards for our inspection. In the pages that follow, I outline some
approaches for pondering these shards grounded in narratology.

Reading Writers Narratologically
Narratology, the theory of narrative, concerns itself first and foremost
with narrative structures and elements essential to telling a story. Prin-
cipal among these elements are the narrator, the “speaker” inscribed
in the text, and the narratee, the “listener” in the story (see Prince,
“Introduction to the Study of the Narratee,” for a fuller discussion of
the characteristics of the narratee). Whether overt or effaced, these
narrators and narratees are the lifeblood of most narratives: the nar-
rator recounts events to her or his narratee while we readers observe
from outside the world in the text.
    Of course, narration takes many forms, narrators and narratees in
some cases barely discernible, yet narratologists have identified a num-
ber of textual indicators of speakers’ and listeners’ presence in addition
to the more obvious personal pronouns such as “I” and “you” (Piwo-
warczyk; Prince, “Introduction,” Dictionary). These indicators allow
us to trace the word-by-word emergence of the one who enunciates
thoughts and the one who attends to them in the world of the text.
    At a more macroscopic level, and as an extension of the symmetri-
cal relationship between narrator and narratee, narratologists speak
of an “implied author” and an “implied reader” for every text. De-
fined as the “implicit image of an author in the text, taken to be stand-
ing behind the scenes and to be responsible for its design and for the
values and cultural norms it adheres to” (Prince, Dictionary 42), the
implied author in a sense represents a text’s engagement with the “real
world” in which it circulates.
    I use the expression “real world” to echo narratologists’ designa-
tion of yet two more entities in this theoretically symmetrical relation-
ship, the “real author” and “real reader.” Exterior to the text, the real
author is the flesh-and-blood writer who has generated the narrator(s),
narratee(s), and the narrative structures through which they relate. The
20      WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


“real reader,” by the same token, is any one of us who brings his or
her eyes to the text. Figure 1, taken from Story and Discourse by Sey-
mour Chatman, illustrates the entities I’ve described.


                                            Text
      Real        Implied                             Implied         Real
     Author   ▼    Author → (Narrator) → (Narratee) → Reader     ▼   Reader


Fig. 1. A Narratological Framework for Reading Writers. Reprinted from Seymour
Chatman, Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film. Copy-
right © 1978 by Cornell University. Used by permission of the publisher, Cornell
University Press.


     Using this narratological framework to analyze nonfiction texts
yields valuable insight on discursively manifested selves. By demarcat-
ing the real author and that author’s textual productions, we can sepa-
rate momentarily textual representations of the writer from the bio-
logical writer, trace the complexities of textual “selves” in the forms
of narrators, narratees, and narrative structures, then read these selves
as they compose an implied author, responsible for the text and for the
values and cultural norms it adheres to. The following section illus-
trates such analysis, which begins by identifying narrators and narratees
in a given text.

Narratological Readings of Classroom Texts

In the excerpt from class discussion that appears in the opening of this
chapter, three “real authors” have voiced utterances that constitute
texts. The opening comment of Anne reveals two narrators, an “I” “as
a writer,” and an “I” who “do[es] this [intellectual] work.” In the light
of Spellmeyer’s comments on the self in discourse, we can say that these
two different appearances of an “I” represent moments when differ-
ent social forces enter into discourse, in this case constituting an “in-
tersection” among (at least) the interests of writing and the interests
of conducting the academic work of ethnographic analysis.
    The “you” of Nidean’s reply seems to designate as narratee Anne’s
“writer” narrator. The interrogative construction signals this narratee
once again, and depending upon one’s interpretation of this mini speech
act when tone and inflection are taken into account, this question es-
                                          RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   21


tablishes a narrator who might represent interests of collaboration
(helping us all negotiate the issue of my analysis and render it fruitful)
and of critique (pointing out to Anne that all “writing” demands self-
consciousness).
     Within the larger context of the course, Anne’s comment to me was
motivated by an earlier instance in which I had misinterpreted a nar-
rator she had posited in a progress report. In pointing out my error to
me, she had said that she was correcting me not just because I might
come up with a faulty analysis of her as a writer but also because she
knew that this analysis might be published and reach a wider audience,
resulting in a misrepresentation to the community of composition
scholars. Hence this “I” also speaks for that community.
     Anne’s response to Nidean reveals yet other issues concerning the
self in discourse that were under negotiation in this scene. The student
narrator that appears (“I’m taking a class”) functions to pit one form
of writing offered in our curriculum (“autobiography”) against the
form offered in this course, ethnography. (Invisible to other members
of the class was a narrative begun when Anne previously took a pro-
seminar in composition studies with me, in which she championed an
expressivist approach to instruction and I a more social-epistemic ap-
proach. Less invisible, perhaps, are other narratives implied by the fact
that autobiography as a course offering in English is more “estab-
lished,” as is the professor who teaches it in our department.) Anne’s
“student” narrator is joined by the “writer” narrator once again,
marked by jargon (“pieces”) and an “I” who summons a liberatory
narrative (“I just let go and write”). A narrative of publicly defending
a position ends her comment (“I . . . can come back at him face to
face”), serving to point out an important facet of these course partici-
pants’ subjectivities—as subjects of analysis—and to remind us all of
the complexities of occupying the positions of analyst and analyzed
in this forum.
     Branden’s intervention speaks to these positions. Like Anne, she
posits a “student” narrator (“could I just make a comment?”), situat-
ing this narrator as a supportive peer (“I understand what you’re say-
ing”) yet locating this narrator as a utilitarian reader who plumbs
course texts to develop her writerly self: “what I’m trying to get out
of this is just sort of develop this critical viewpoint.” As she grapples
to articulate this last position, the starts and stops marked by dashes
in the transcription could be seen as graphic demonstration of the
struggle among social forces to enter discourse.
22    WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


     At the “real author” level as I’ve framed it here, this scene shows
issues of “selves and others” being negotiated with respect to the in-
stitutional subjectivities of instructor and student and to the research
subjectivities of analyst and analyzed. At the textual level, other selves
and others find manifestation, with different narrators providing sites
for social forces to enter discourse, representing the interests of class
participants, collaborators, peers, and writers. As concerns the inter-
ests of writers, they enter discourse here as multifaceted: as self-con-
scious work, as liberatory experience, as critical reflection.
     As a “text,” this excerpt from a class discussion in 1993 illustrates
the complex subjectivities that surface and recede in a brief five-minute
classroom exchange. The written texts that paralleled such exchanges,
because they were focused on discursive practices in workplace cul-
tures, provided similarly rich manifestations of subjectivity. Working
with these student-practitioner-researchers each year, I composed
analyses of subjectivities that we reviewed together as part of our in-
formed intersubjective research. Thus the course entailed researching
the discursive self as part and parcel of academic assignments focused
on writing in workplace cultures, an endeavor that enriched this one-
semester academic experience. To render this research valuable to
writers and scholars exterior to the course, I will first review ration-
ales for research on nonacademic writing then link these rationales to
that of an archaeology in the following section.

Exploring Discursive Selves Beyond Academic Borders
Just as classroom studies of writers’ discursive subjectivities are often
hampered by the flat source medium of the academic essay, so are stud-
ies of writing in the workplace limited by their motivation: most of-
ten they are conducted exclusively to utilitarian ends, owing to fund-
ing, and focus not on writers so much as the writing. Such research
thus ignores discursive subjectivities because they are deemed irrel-
evant. James E. Porter and Patricia Sullivan note this lacuna in work-
place research, all the while suggesting links with classroom research:
     Workplace research too often assumes that knowledge about the work-
     place should feed classroom practice, but not vice versa. The classroom
     perhaps is the best site for effecting fundamental changes in the nature
     of workplace literacy; it certainly provides an opportunity for experimen-
     tation, for testing new possibilities (whereas workplace action can be con-
     strained by “the way things have always been done”). (315)
                                           RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   23


The goals of research as framed in the Cultures of Professional Writ-
ing course are first to capture “the way things have always been done”
in a given local culture and then to reflect critically upon these local
practices and imagine possible alternatives, including alternative dis-
cursive formations and attendant subject positions.
     As course instructor and researcher drawing upon course partici-
pants’ primary research, I have sketched the methodologies for elabo-
rating our informed intersubjective research along lines similar to those
suggested by Gesa E. Kirsch and Joy S. Ritchie in “Beyond the Personal:
Theorizing a Politics of Location in Composition Research.” They sug-
gest that “research participants must be invited to articulate research
questions, to speak for themselves” (13), and each term, course par-
ticipants did indeed elaborate their own research questions once we
had framed the research through reviews of workplace ethnographies
and an introduction to ethnographic fieldwork methods. This position
on methodologies resonates not only with recent trends in composi-
tion but also with research principles grounded in feminism. Drawing
on Sandra Harding’s groundbreaking work on feminist theory and
social science methodology (“Introduction: Is There a Feminist Meth-
od?”), Kirsch calls attention to the purpose of the researcher’s ques-
tions: “they must be grounded in the subject’s experience and be rel-
evant to the subject” (“Methodological Pluralism” 256). Discerning
more fully writers’ subjectivities among workplace discourses seeks to
heed this purpose.
     Questions and issues raised through such research have varied
dramatically and provocatively, both in researchers’ chosen topics and
themes to pursue and in their authorship in doing so. As to the latter,
our classroom meld of research/writing workshop allowed us to ad-
dress other issues of research principles raised by undertaking such
work, in particular with regard to the entry into ethnographic discourse
by course participants as primary researchers. As outlined in the intro-
duction, ethnographers have embraced recent epistemological issues
in authorship and the politics of representation with wonderful insight
in recent years, leading to textual representations of cultures grounded
in rigorous fieldwork methodology all the while situating the “I” who
narrates these representations of “self” and “other.” The vital ques-
tions that many ethnographic researcher-theorists have asked them-
selves revolve around their representative practices in the roles of schol-
ars producing and reproducing academic fields. The questions that
researchers have raised in the Cultures of Professional Writing course
24    WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


are no less vital, yet they are formulated in a different rhetorical arena:
addressing their accounts to fellow writers, possibly to workplace
managers, and through me to composition scholars and researchers in
professional writing, course participants have struggled with compos-
ing an “I” (and its surrogates) that sways these audiences. Hence the
intellectual realm of ethnography joins those of politics, psychology,
and philosophy invoked earlier to theorize discursive subjectivities,
with this theorizing linked solidly to pragmatics. Ruth Behar, address-
ing the plotting of ethnographic narratives as part of her introduction
to Women Writing Culture, observes: “How we plot ourselves into our
fictions has everything to do with how we plot ourselves into our lives”
(15). Two central goals of exploring discursive subjectivities beyond
the academy through the informed intersubjective research of our
course and this book have been to equip professional writers with an
array of ideas on how to plot themselves into their future work lives
and to equip writing teachers with ideas for alternative plots in the
classroom. Such ideas will hopefully spring from the archaeological
displays and analyses in the following chapters.
     As a writing teacher, I was prompted by my intersubjective research
with course participants in 1993 and 1994 to revisit the opening chap-
ters of The Archaeology of Knowledge, in which Foucault explores the
construction of subject positions in nineteenth-century medical dis-
course. In the spring of 1995, I included this text in our course read-
ings, and I prompted course participants to consider the subject posi-
tions of professional writers in twenty-first-century discourse as they
engaged with Foucault’s analysis. We discussed the text in class with
the help of philosopher Debra Bergoffen, who extended her metaphor
of uncovering shards during archaeological work, cited in the intro-
duction, to say the following:
     There’s no singular subject. There are subjective positions within particu-
     lar discourses. I’ve got surfaces on which these discourses appear. And I
     want to know the rules by which these discourses operate. If I figure out
     these rules, I will discover how objects are composed . . . . I get an object
     by putting the shards together; I don’t get an object by digging deeper. I
     don’t look for intentions . . . I look for regularities, I look for rules. . . .
        When you do that you’re going to discover, not that these unities never
     existed, but that they came into existence according to certain rules of
     discourse. It’s not a question of “are these unities true or false?” Fou-
     cault says, let’s see what practices produced those unities; let’s see whether
     they’re the only unities that get produced by these practices. Maybe if
                                           RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   25


    we take a good look at the practices, we’ll discover other kinds of uni-
    ties. (in class, 5/1/96)

     In Cultures of Professional Writing, course participants take stock
of the kinds of discourses at work in their research sites, conducting
primary archaeological work on the forms of discourse in which writ-
ers work, the ways and moments in which particular discourses mani-
fest themselves, the ways in which certain discourses easily dovetail
with some while resisting connections with others, and the like. One
of our goals is to imagine alternative unities that might take form when
discursive formations and practices are exposed through this archaeo-
logical undertaking. This book seeks to support researchers and writ-
ers at other sites by displaying the shards collected over seven years of
research, in the hope that these shards can be compared to those of
other digs and that alternative unities can take form in other settings.
To support such comparisons, I extend the narratological readings of
student writers above to demonstrate readings that trace discursive
contours of subjectivity, as discourses shape writers’ schooling, pro-
fessional writing backgrounds, organizational sites of work, and work-
place cultures. Because shards of Branden’s discursive subjectivity have
already been introduced, I will trace her appearances throughout the
book as an illustration.
     Branden’s abstract, “Discursive Elitism in a Government Travel
Agency” (see appendix D), opens with a narrator identified as a “par-
ticipant observer,” thus introducing the social force of fieldwork meth-
odology as part of the social sciences into discourse. This social force
is strongly bolstered by references to the “local culture,” a “principal
informant,” and the explicit naming of a scholar in organizational
psychology, Edgar H. Schein (“Organizational Culture”). The narra-
tor is also a text analyst, thus introducing social forces emanating from
discourse studies generally and English studies in particular. These two
social forces—a tradition of research on social practices and structures
and a tradition of text analysis grounded in discourse studies—begin
to sketch a discursive formation in which certain objects of analysis
fall within the limits of valid study while others do not. This is no small
fact: discursive scenes from classrooms to workplaces regularly desig-
nate valid topics, and part of archaeological work entails making ex-
plicit the terms of validation. The “self” in this abstract finds its posi-
tion among discourses validated by our course work and which might
not be validated by research “sponsored” (Brandt) by other institu-
26   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


tions. The implied author that emerges in the abstract has gleaned some
organizational maneuvering via textual practices that she might not
have gleaned outside this particular discursive formation—no trivial
matter when we consider that the “real” Branden leaves the classroom
with knowledge thus constructed.
     Other shards represent aspects of Branden’s discursive subjectiv-
ity via the tables in appendixes A, B, and C. Appendix A shows re-
searchers’ professional writing backgrounds, representing Branden as
a freelance, self-employed writer. Such a writing “self” is exceptional
in this data set, and scanning the table prompts one to consider dis-
cursive formations from a slightly different angle: the discourse of pro-
fessional writing forms what Foucault would call “various situations
that the subject can occupy” (Archaeology 53), in this case remunera-
tive situations in which discursive range and scope vary significantly.
The discursive work of a freelancer and the ways in which this work
shapes subjectivity by virtue of the relations it establishes and prolongs
with other workplace groups, for example, differs from that of jour-
nalists, of technical writers, of teachers, and so on.
     Appendix B displays key points taken from Branden’s written rep-
resentation of herself as a writer. Here we might understand “forma-
tion” in the sense of schooling (the double entendre in French supports
such a reading even though Foucault does not mention it) and note that
scholastic experience shaped Branden’s vision of what constitutes “writ-
ing” with a bias toward the literary tradition. Chapter 2 discusses the
ways in which an “author function” has served to establish realms of
discursive exclusivity as writers enter discourse, and Branden’s equation
of writing with Shakespeare signals such a function at work. Through
publication under her name (a cultural sine qua non for assuming the
mantle of “writer,” many researchers report), she enters such a realm,
albeit at a lesser status, and so manifests a self shaped in part by the
forces of the publishing industry and the relations among writers and
readers it establishes. The discursive self in this table also signals the
interests of the market in shaping professional writing subjectivity.
     Appendix C lists all researchers by the nature of the organization
they studied. The categories I’ve derived to accommodate all sites of
study prompt musings on subjectivity. In his analysis of the evolution
of nineteenth-century medical discourse, Foucault speaks of describ-
ing the different kinds of institutional sites from which subjects speak
and from which a discourse derives its source and points of applica-
tion (51). Just as a subject’s purview in a hospital (and its discourses)
might differ from that in a clinic (and its discourses), so do subjects of
                                           RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE SELF   27


discourse in twentieth-century professional writing discourse find their
purviews shaped in different ways depending upon the nature of the
organization. A writer in a private business is positioned vis-à-vis other
subjects in very different ways from a writer in a government agency,
for example, and the discursive selves that will take form in these scenes
will differ dramatically.
     Within each category of sites, too, the terms of subjectivity for writ-
ing selves differ significantly according to writers’ work and positions
as observed. Among the researchers who studied government agencies
and institutions, we glimpse Branden observing policy and planning
writing in a part of the Department of Commerce, suggesting subjec-
tivities for writers that are quite directly shaped by the state. Against
the background information of her abstract, we can imagine the or-
ganizational scope of writers being shaped by discursive subject posi-
tions that are inscribed in a weekly report that “allowed certain play-
ers to hold other members to projected roles in the organization, all
the while elaborating their own.” In government accounting, one’s
organizational roles as documented in reports can sometimes have the
weight of terms writ in stone.
     Branden’s appearance in chapter 4 sheds light on an aspect of
writers’ subjectivities in organizations as inflected by document pro-
cesses. The lists of skills, status, roles, and the like came from the full
ethnographies and class discussions. In the section devoted to the dy-
namics of collective procedures and writing, we see Branden’s abstract
supplemented by the observation that an organizational player was able
to gain personal credit for collective production through the process
of document routing. The observation calls attention to the fact that
document processing, seemingly benign in any flow chart, serves as a
mechanism for presenting a self in different ways depending upon
organizational position. Readers interested in this phenomenon might
also consult Ana’s account to glean ways in which the contours of
document processing might offer slightly different subject positions
depending upon the nature of the institutional site.
     Chapter 5 presents discursive features of organizational author-
ship, with a particular slant. The first three sections approach discourse
in a modernist mode, whereas the following three sections use a more
postmodern approach. I explain this construction in chapter 5; for pur-
poses here, one notes that Branden, while studying a document that
in a modernist mode constitutes a policy statement (section 1), also
observed organizational maneuvering (section 6) as an effect of dis-
course that posits subject positions strongly along government bureau-
28   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


cratic lines, as discussed above. As with the lists in chapter 4, one can
glean more on this phenomenon of discursive subjectivity by going to
abstracts of researchers observing similar features (Ana and Mandy).
     As we trace the representations of any of the eighty-four research-
ers through these pages, pondering narrators, implied authors, docu-
mented discourses, and subjects’ positions in them, we can use them
to great advantage by pondering Foucault’s celebrated questions: “What
are the modes of existence of this discourse? Where has it been, how
can it circulate, and who can appropriate it for himself? What are the
places in it where there is room for possible subjects? Who can assume
these various subject positions?” (“What Is an Author?” 120).
     Though these questions were used by Foucault to conclude his es-
say postulating ways in which an author “function” had taken form
in literary discourse, the same questions speak compellingly to profes-
sional writers, discourse managers, researchers, and compositionists as
we research discursive selves. The term “author” might hinder, because
the belletristic tradition uses this term solely for the literary author. But
as Roger Chartier points out, earlier ages prioritized uses of “author”
differently: in seventeenth-century France, for example, the term “au-
thor” was used more often to designate one engaged in discourses of
practical affairs than literary affairs (40). The history of U.S. compo-
sition instruction as sketched in the introduction works against us here,
since most composing has been taught under paradigms of belletristic
authorship. Yet archaeological inquiry resists understandings limited
exclusively to recent pasts and pushes us to imagine other unities.
     So, too, does recent composition theory aimed at exploring the dis-
cursive self, as sketched in the introduction. Lester Faigley’s prompt to
explore agency as constructed from multiple subject positions can be
considered while pondering the many workplace subject positions rep-
resented in the following chapters in specific organizational contexts.
Likewise, we can respond to Susan Miller’s suggestion that we seek to
disclose connections between specific local and textual superstructures
(and that we highlight how writing situations construct their partici-
pant writers before, during, and after they undertake a piece of writ-
ing) by considering the shards of this archaeology and matching them
with shards from other sites. To aid us all in such explorations of agency
among institutional structures and practices, the next chapter completes
part one of this book by sketching a profile of the eighty-four profes-
sional writers and aspiring professional writers whose research and re-
searching selves define the terrain of this archaeological undertaking.
2   WHAT IS A WRITER?

    A few years ago I would not have defined myself as a writer, and
    today I still don’t use the term “writer” if asked what I do for a
    living. I usually reply, “I’m in public relations.” Then, if asked
    what I do on a daily basis, I respond, “I do a lot of writing.”
    Still, I hesitate to categorize myself as a writer. . . . I think my
    hesitation comes from my immediate perception of what
    someone is when she does define herself as a writer. My first
    thought is that the person must write literature or poetry for a
    living. The rest of us are journalists, or public relations profes-
    sionals, or proposal managers, but not writers.
                                      —Ann, self-assessment as a writer

    How, under what conditions, and in what forms can something
    like a subject appear in the order of discourse? What place can it
    occupy in each type of discourse, what functions can it assume,
    and by obeying what rules? In short, it is a matter of depriving
    the subject (or its substitute) of its role as originator, and of
    analyzing the subject as a variable and complex function of
    discourse.
                             —Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?”




                                                                           29
30    WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES




A  s noted in chapter 1, Foucault’s project in “What Is an Author?”
was to trace ways in which fetishisms of literary authorship worked
to maintain systems of hierarchy that admitted certain subjects while
excluding others. In proposing an “author function” as an object of
study in place of flesh-and-blood authors, he sought to prompt dis-
cursive inquiry into the ways in which the concept of authorship op-
erated systemically in cultural constructions of knowledge. As a title,
historically, the term “author” identified a set of discursive subjects
distinct from “writer” and marked by cultural features such as publi-
cation. Discussing figures of the author in seventeenth-century France,
Roger Chartier observes that “the term ‘author’ presupposed printed
circulation of works and, in return, recourse to the press distinguished
the ‘author’ from the ‘writer’” (40).
     In her essay “writing and Writing,” Sharon Crowley traces ways
in which current-traditional composition pedagogy has effected simi-
lar systemic distinctions among subjects:
     There’s writing, which is the simple ordering and recording of thoughts
     or information and which can be done as easily by a secretary or a com-
     mittee or a machine or a technical writer, since its author-ity is not rel-
     evant to its status as text; and there’s Writing, what Authors (and authors)
     do. (97)

Crowley uses capitalization to signal levels of exclusivity in sketching
the ways in which current-traditional epistemology works to maintain
exclusion, positioning the student writer’s work outside the realm of
the real: “Each such [writing] effort is expendable, marking, as it does,
only a stage in a learner’s/writer’s progress toward ‘real’ writing” (94).
The subject position offered by such epistemology to student writers
is thus always one that replicates distinctions based on cultural prac-
tices of publication, which date, as Chartier’s research demonstrates,
to at least the seventeenth century and an era when the modes of dis-
cursive production and consumption were radically different from those
of today. Because writers such as Ann have been disciplined by such
                                                      WHAT IS A WRITER?   31


discursive epistemology, it’s easy to understand their inclination to
disqualify themselves as writers, even if they spend the majority of their
active lives writing. Crowley’s ironic equation of secretaries (a cultur-
ally gendered position), committees, machines, and technical writers
(her ordering heightens the irony) signals several of the features mark-
ing professional writing at the end of the twentieth century, which will
be explored from various angles in this book to characterize the au-
thorship of professional writers.
      I have chosen Ann’s comments as an epigraph because they reflect
a strongly recurrent phenomenon in the researchers’ written and oral
self-representations as writers all seven years: more often than not,
these professional writers and aspiring professional writers would not
claim the title “writer.” Whereas current-traditional epistemology helps
explain this phenomenon, so does a consideration of other epistemolo-
gies that have figured in these researchers’ educations. Their ages var-
ied from mid-twenties to mid-forties, meaning that the English classes
in which they received composition instruction (at both secondary and
postsecondary levels) would have been strongly shaped by New Criti-
cal understandings of texts in force since at least the early 1960s and
still strong today. Like all theoretical movements, New Criticism has ad-
vantages and disadvantages, yet with regard to its effects on studying
writers’ understandings of their own subjectivities established through
and elaborated within discursive work, the disadvantages weigh heav-
ily. By eliminating the (published) writer’s intentions and the reader’s
affect from the domain of “objective” criticism, New Critical thought
frames discursive products as nearly autonomous objects. That the in-
stances of an “I” entering discourse via student writing in such a theo-
retical arena would be dramatically limited goes without saying; and
it seems quite plausible that a secondary effect would be a systematic,
subtle suppression of one’s affect as a legitimate and important con-
cern upon entry into discourse as a writer.
      Thus professional writers often deny themselves their titles as a
result of several forces in English disciplining, making them a profes-
sional class marked by remarkable self-effacement—particularly with
respect to the other professional classes with which they daily inter-
act. This self-denial is compounded by strictly formalist understand-
ings of writing that circulate widely among those other professionals:
in written self-analyses and in class discussions, the metaphor of a
“talking handbook” has recurred when professional writers described
their colleagues’ manifested understandings of their expertise. Given
32   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


the likelihood that most of these colleagues endured Composition 101
in a current-traditional model that emphasizes primarily formal char-
acteristics (which Sharon Crowley characterizes as driven by a “theory
of graphic display,” Composition 97), this interpretation of profes-
sional writers’ subjectivity is perfectly understandable. As a professional
class, then, writers find their discursive subjectivities constructed in dra-
matically reductive manners from a number of cultural quarters. Part
of the project in this book is to begin reshaping the terms defining this
class by taking stock of its own “author functions” and the cultural
processes related to those functions.
     As a professional category, “professional writer” is somewhat dif-
fuse, owing to the varieties of writing that might be performed and the
wide range of workplaces that serve as sites for writing. (Bureau of
Labor statistics group writers with “artists, entertainers, and athletes”
and provide categorical breakdowns only for “authors,” “technical
writers,” “editors and reporters,” and “public relations specialists”
[table 11].) Barbara Couture speaks in terms of “career writers,” inti-
mating occupational longevity and limiting her set to those who write
on technical and “professional” subjects: “Technical/professional
writing is that variety of writing in the workplace that is constrained
by the occupational responsibilities of career writers, a term I shall use
to refer to those professionals in organizations who write on techni-
cal/professional subjects for a living” (26).
     Couture’s definition allows her to contrast professional writing
with other kinds of writing prevalent in workplaces—in her study, with
engineering writing and administrative writing. She further contrasts
professional writing to these two by pointing out that “technical/pro-
fessional writing has been defined as a rhetorical category by career
writers’ perspectives on effective communication and by rhetoricians’
perspectives on the role of the technical/professional writer in organi-
zational contexts” (26).
     This positing of technical writing and professional writing as syn-
onymous is driven not only by Couture’s particular data set but also
by the evolution of professional writing as a topic of instruction and
research in academic settings. Sullivan and Porter describe a “curricu-
lar geography,” in which “professional writing” has traditionally found
itself in a parallel slot with “technical writing” and “business writing,”
all three of which are usually positioned in English departments as an
“adjunct or service” to “English [as] Literature” (see figure 2). Sullivan
and Porter propose a new geography that establishes professional
                                                                     WHAT IS A WRITER?    33


writing as a major and recognizes it as a research field, forecasting,
perhaps, directions in curriculum and research to come that can indeed
begin to characterize professional writing more fully in terms of its local
and larger cultural functions. Their proposal, grounded in a review of
curricular history, resonates with observations from the workplace:
Kathleen Gregory, following the work of Van Maanen and Barley, has
described “occupational communities” that crosscut organizations in
Silicon Valley, and as the field of communications coevolves with tech-
nology, occupational communities of writers are certain to grow. (One
could argue that the Society for Technical Communication constitutes
one such community, its membership 23,000 strong.) The interests that
unite writers as a professional class are developed in part three, draw-
ing on the profiles and desires as documented in this chapter.


 Academic
     Field
                               English (as) Literature

  Adjuncts               Creative                                                   Workplace
and Service   Film       Writing

                  Rhetoric/                                             Business
                                Linguistics                                         ▼
                 Composition                                            Writing
                                                                Technical
                                                                                    ▼
                                                                 Writing
                                                      Professional
                                                                                    ▼
                                                        Writing

                                              Journalism                            ▼




Fig. 2. Sullivan and Porter’s Curricular Geography. From Patricia A. Sullivan and
James E. Porter, “Remapping Curricular Geography: Professional Writing in/and
English.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993), p. 393,
copyright © 1993 by Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Sage Pub-
lications, Inc.



    Were we to expand Couture’s definition of professional writing to
begin to embrace the work of professional writers in adequate detail,
we would probably want to include some reference to the handling of
digitized information in the form of text and graphics, given the de-
gree to which professional writers now handle document design and
Web design. We would certainly emphasize that most often these writ-
ers work in collaboration with other writers and specialists from other
34   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


fields, managing the plural authorship of singular texts in the capaci-
ties of drafter, editor, associate editor, technical writer, and the like. In
practice, rarely do professional writers live exclusively the subject posi-
tion of textual originator, thus providing a concrete example of a Fou-
cauldian tenet aimed at exploring authorship in the cultural plane. Pro-
fessional writers in practice live subject positions multiply configured
by organizational and discursive structures, and this archaeology at-
tempts to map some of them by cataloguing data on eighty-four such
writers’ backgrounds and workplace experiences.
     This chapter initiates some cataloguing by drawing upon appen-
dix B, in which topics in written self-assessments are summarized. In
the second class meeting of our course each year, researchers submit-
ted prose analyses of themselves as writers, based on a model for plan-
ning professional trajectories that was provided by the university’s
career services office in the first class meeting. Under headings derived
from topics and commentary in these analyses, I draw some synthe-
ses. These syntheses are offered to complement readers’ encounters with
individual researchers as they trace them across various chapters and
to point out trends and patterns that mark this class of professional.
Thus some initial profiles of professional writers take form, serving
as a springboard, hopefully, for all readers desiring to grasp in greater
complexity what a professional writer might be.

Profiles of Professional Writers
Appendix A displays the backgrounds of the eighty-four researchers,
81 percent of whom were women, who took part in this project. As a
glance reveals, the majority of them had experience primarily with
organizational publications, most often in the capacity of editor, copy
editor, or editorial assistant in the publication of annual reports, bro-
chures, newsletters, magazines, and the like. Other backgrounds fig-
uring heavily across this set of researchers include technical writing/
editing and analysis/correspondence. The technical writers and editors
had worked in contexts from small entrepreneurial businesses to mid-
size software or engineering firms (in which they found themselves
working in technical writing teams) to large contracting corporations
with the government. The analysis and correspondence writers often
had experience in composing (singly and collectively) reports and let-
ters for both internal and external audiences, several of them in very
large corporate settings. Other workplace discursive experiences that
                                                         WHAT IS A WRITER?   35


these researchers brought to this project included public relations/policy
writing, research writing, journalism, graphic design, and teaching. That
thirteen of the researchers held experience in this last field owes in part
to the fact that our MA program offers a track in the teaching of writ-
ing and literature, and several students from that track had taken Cul-
tures of Professional Writing as an elective. Yet as discussions through-
out the book display, I hope, teaching and professional writing overlap
theoretically and pragmatically in many ways, most of which remain
untapped in contemporary inquiries into each. Finally, it is notewor-
thy that only two of these eighty-four researchers had no prior expe-
rience in professional writing, and only two more had experience solely
as self-employed freelancers, which means that the large majority of
researchers represented in this book were already familiar with pro-
fessional writing in organizational settings.
     As a set, these writers’ experiences also reflect George Mason Uni-
versity’s geographic location. Just fifteen miles from Washington, D.C.,
the university offers the only MA program in professional writing and
editing in the area. Thus many people who have gained professional
writing experience in the governmental, para-governmental, and lob-
bying organizations that abound come to the program in Professional
Writing and Editing to update knowledge and skills to enhance their
current organizational status or to move to a better job. Many, too,
work in the burgeoning beltway private sector producing publications
for private and public audiences alike. The analyses of themselves as
writers used for the following profiles touched upon literally hundreds
of aspects of writing, and finding appropriate categories for classify-
ing shards from these analyses has been no easy task. Indeed, in archae-
ological work, classification is a much more complex task than it might
seem, as Ken Dark explains:

    Take, for example, a piece of pottery: is it the dimensions (or some of
    them), or the fabric . . . which we consider worthy of classification? Do
    we consider the surface treatment of the inside or the outside of the pot?
    How much variation is significant? Do we assign importance to the weight
    of the pottery sherd, where it was found, its colours, its possible func-
    tion, or the way it has broken? The choice between these options is not
    obvious. . . . (78)

The parallels between traditional archaeological fieldwork and discur-
sive archaeology in the realm of professional writing are compelling:
among the many “shards” turned up through research on and by pro-
36   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


fessional writers, which categories prove the most fruitful in yielding
knowledge on writers and their subjectivities as a professional class?
In this chapter and the chapters to follow, I have derived categories
with an eye to specific users of this book, whom I envision to be prac-
ticing writers, workplace managers, academics teaching and conduct-
ing research in professional writing, and other scholars interested in
the domain of professional writing as it might inform theory and teach-
ing in discourse studies. The categories for mounting an initial profile
that address all of these users and which emerge convincingly from the
commentaries on writing backgrounds by the researchers in this project
are the following: Learning to Write, Conceptualizing the Self in Writ-
ing, and Professional Writing Experiences.

Learning to Write

Current-traditional composition epistemology and New Critical liter-
ary theory as sketched theoretically above have joined other forces to
shape these writers’ discursive understandings and experiences as they
report them. Students admitted to the MA program in Professional
Writing and Editing in which this research took place possess under-
graduate degrees in English, for the most part. This bias is due largely
to admission procedures that screen applicants with an eye to the grad-
uate courses in literature that must be taken as part of the degree; stu-
dents with no backgrounds in literature, it is feared, will have a diffi-
cult time performing in these courses and so few are admitted. Thus
as a “data set” the self-assessments as writers reflect a strong literary
disciplining which, when effected through curricular forms common
to most undergraduate departments of English, in turn reflects a con-
struction of instrumental writing as peripheral, less complex than writ-
ing in the belletristic tradition, as noted in Sullivan and Porter’s dis-
cussion of curricular geography. Yet a glance at appendix B reveals that
constructions of writing as an essentially individual endeavor, prizing
fiction and poetry as more interesting or more venerated, begin before
undergraduate work or even scholastic experience. Such views of writ-
ing derive no doubt from the many and varied cultural representations
of writing that begin in early childhood, to be reinforced through
schooling practices. As mentioned in chapter 1, Foucault’s frequent
allusions to “discursive formations” prove provocative in this sense,
in that “formations” can designate both the networked practices pro-
duced by specific institutional sites of discourse and the schooling of
                                                      WHAT IS A WRITER?   37


any writer operating among various discursive formations. The double
entendre provokes the simultaneous consideration of cultural construc-
tions of writing and individual articulations to these constructions that
no postmodern understandings of discursive work can do without. The
syntheses that follow are offered to prompt such consideration.
     Writing “talent” often manifests early in life. Nancy dated her
writing debut to age six, and Nyck “dreamed of writing since fourth
grade.” Many other researchers cited similar early signs (Alice, Brenda,
Daisy, Gary, George, Grace, Gwen, Itsy, Janice, Megan, Tom). Stories
of childhood story writing are so prevalent, in fact, that people who
were attracted to writing after childhood may even refer to themselves
as “late bloomers” (Norma). And even as researchers noted influences
from the immediate environment (Red noted that his mother was a
painter), the sense of a calling lent by such constructions of writing
led one to claim a “natural affinity for language” (Hart), and another
to fear, albeit tongue-in-cheek, that “the writing gene had passed me
by” (Jan).
     Initial forays into writing are often in the realm of fiction. Nancy’s
oeuvre at age six was a novel (The Big Dog), Brenda penned a “mys-
tery novel,” Megan a “creative writing book” in fifth grade. Janice
wrote of “sitting on the floor around my father’s desk, pretending to
write stories while he worked on his column.” Clearly, the storytelling
impulse is strongly culturally bound with writing.
     Writing skills develop over time. Emma noted shifts over time from
“notecards and outlines” to “writer-based” writing, to “audience-
based,” mirroring some shifts in composition theory and pedagogy in
the last two decades. Cass pinpointed key moments in development
throughout her life, and Mandy traced her learning even into the
present. Gwen cited learning on the job, Kyle still intends to “practice
to perfection,” Heather is “just starting out as a writer,” and Anita
considers herself a “writer-in-progress.”
     Schooling in writing included rewards, nurturing, exposure to
varieties of genres. Megan won her fifth grade creative writing con-
test, and has her name “engraved on a plaque that I assume still hangs
over the doorway of a bright yellow classroom at James Buchanan Ele-
mentary School.” George remembered winning a high school essay
contest, and Bernie’s high school experience offered him writing as an
“expressive outlet.” Cass “excelled in research papers in high school,”
and Albert developed in high school AP English, later to be encour-
aged by a college English professor. Kirsten noted college instruction
38   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


by a professional magazine writer. Many researchers cited forays into
poetry, journal writing, humor writing, and letter writing alongside
other academic writing (Alice, Brenda, Grace, Gwen, Helen, Karla,
Kyle, May, Phoebe, Starla).
     Learning writing is often autodidactic. Even as these researchers
acknowledged the many school influences in their writing, they also
occasionally raised the issue of autodidacticism when learning to write.
Rachel noted early employment and teaching herself to write in dif-
ferent styles, and numerous researchers mentioned struggling alone
with finding the right words. Comments such as these surely derive
not only from the primary construction of writing in our culture as
essentially individual but also from the commonplace that good writ-
ing can’t be taught—only learned. In some cases (Gwen, Tess, Maggie),
it derives as well from the reality of having to learn constantly to per-
form duties as professional writers and editors—a topic to be rejoined
below and in later chapters.
     Undeniably, we begin learning to write from the earliest ventures
into discourse, even before learning forms of any kind—even before
learning, one might argue, the very rudiments of inscription, so strong
is the promise of discursive engagement. As one learns to write in U.S.
culture, we glean from the syntheses above, not only does the sway of
narrative loom powerful but also schooling practices emphasize, struc-
ture, and reward only individual achievement in discursive work. Thus
both broad cultural forces and schooling emphasize individual talent
in the singular authorship mode of fiction, reinforcing an understand-
ing of the writer as independent and solitary in production, an under-
standing deconstructed by Linda Brodkey in “Modernism and the
Scene(s) of Writing.” In professional writing perhaps more so than any
other form, such an understanding of writing is not only theoretically
counterproductive but pragmatically impossible: professional writers
write in contexts, and recent theory and research aimed at classroom
practice (Lunsford and Ede, Singular Texts/Plural Authors; Forman;
Lay and Karis; Reagan et al.; Selber et al.; Dias et al.) underscore the
need for teachers to offer students new scenes for conceptualizing their
writing selves. As we ponder the profiles of professional writing and
workplace authorship in its cultural dimensions, it behooves us to
consider how these childhood experiences fundamentally shape one’s
understanding of discursive selves—and to consider those early discur-
sive experiences that later become lost or transformed.
                                                      WHAT IS A WRITER?   39


Conceptualizing the Self in Writing

Early learning, schooling, and the discursive experiences that ensue pro-
duce an array of conceptualizations of the self in writing and as a writer,
as suggested by the self-assessment topics in appendix B. Syntheses
across them highlight some of these conceptualizations.
     The writer at times becomes a medium. Closely related to the theme
of autodidacticism is the narrative of writer as medium. Leigh wrote
of a story “flowing out of me naturally,” Alice noted that “interest
allows immersion” in a topic, and Lois likens the writer to a “reverse
prism,” speaking of “stories demanding to be told.”
     Writing is often equated with literary authorship or publication
under one’s name. Branden “equated writing with Shakespeare” early
in her life, and Mandy is “not a writer yet” because she is unpublished.
Hart constructed her idealized writerly self as an amalgamation of three
renowned writers in fiction and nonfiction. These researchers’ thoughts
echo those of Ann cited in the chapter’s epigraph, a strong cultural
commonplace in the United States.
     Writing is an encounter with the world. Writing may constitute an
exploration of this world (Jillian), permitting the writer to learn about
it (Gloria, Gwen, Holly, Lisa, Tess) and to enjoy it (Brenda, Daisy,
Sarah, Tess). Close observation and analysis may be a part of this en-
counter (Janice), as may be interviewing other people (Adam, Jackie,
Kirsten, Maggie). It may be perceived as both an art (Chet, Red, Rex)
and a science—as in problem solving or puzzle solving (Brenda,
Corinne, Ellie, Joe).
     Writing is protean in terms of difficulty and engagement. Writing
is hard work at times (Emma, Hart, Norma), easy at others (Lee), hum-
drum at still others (Brenda). It requires discipline (Gary, Sue) and prac-
tice (Adam, Kyle), and one must be “methodical and precise” (Gary).
     Writing exposes oneself. Inevitably exposing one’s self to assess-
ment by and response from others (Brenda, Daisy, Sue, Tom), endur-
ing their scrutiny (Ann) and editing (Starla), writing requires coming
to terms with vulnerability (Tom).
     Writing is linked to feelings. Writing can serve as a refuge (Hart)
and can be employed to examine feelings (Lee), invariably eliciting
them: writing is playful (Lee), painful (Kelly, Tess), fun (Anita, Kirsten,
Kyle), therapeutic (Janice, Nyck, Phoebe, Red, Sue), even cathartic
(Leigh).
40   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


     Writing represents a livelihood. Even though only Joanne, Rachel,
and Ravi developed this topic in their self-assessments, the topic sur-
faced frequently in class discussions.
     Writing elicits emotional reactions. It provides satisfaction (Ann,
Daisy, Karla), a sense of purpose, responsibility and pride (Ann, Gin-
ger, Gloria) or of “occupational pleasure” (George), involving creativity
(Ann, Liz)—even passion (Chet)—and at times engendering frustra-
tion (Ann) or stress (Norma). Writing can render one “prone to ago-
nizing” (Adam, Adria) or moody (Sue), making it difficult, to “convey
emotion” (Corinne); or, alternatively, one can attain “an emotional high
from crafting words” (Elaine) or maybe even a “thrill” (Mack).
     Writing is at times highly “personal” (as opposed to public/pro-
fessional). Many researchers deemed it pertinent to represent their
writerly selves as at least bivalent between the personal and the profes-
sional, including in the former category writing such as personal cor-
respondence, journal entries, and poetry addressed to friends. Jen cited
the former as the “most clear” and Ann actually included “proposals
for nonprofits” among the personal, since they afford her satisfaction
through volunteering. Jeff idealized his writerly self as a “male Erma
Bombeck,” and Ray fictionalized his future self as “writing indepen-
dently on the beach in Honolulu, Hawaii.” Ray’s comment serves to
pinpoint the element of escapism that imbues many of these research-
ers’ comments on their writerly selves (and that reflects a common cul-
tural experience of readerly experiences of authorship), and at the same
time limns a leitmotif among professional writers: for many, their ul-
timate aim is to write a novel and publish it.
     This last opposition of categories, the personal and the profes-
sional, is significant in a variety of ways. It is strongly recurrent. Among
those students who did not employ it in their written self-assessments,
the professional/personal binary almost inevitably surfaced in class dis-
cussions at some point during the course. In part yet another facet of
the narrative of individual talent so frequent in these researcher’s com-
ments on early discursive experience, this opposition of categories also
underscores the degree to which writing—as engagement with language
and discourse—is so often integral to knowledge that one builds in
several discursive domains simultaneously. Yet as later depictions of
workplace writing experiences will show, writers are frequently posi-
tioned both organizationally and conceptually in ways that dramati-
cally limit the kinds of knowledge they might pursue, thus leaving much
of the potential of workplace discursive work untapped. As noted in
                                                      WHAT IS A WRITER?   41


the introduction, organizational researcher Shoshana Zuboff claims
that in informated workplaces, learning is the new form of labor. Janet
Emig’s demonstration that writing constitutes a unique mode of learn-
ing, when teamed with studies of writing in its heuristic dimensions
(e.g., Young et al.), underscores the degree to which the early-twenti-
eth-century shift in both the academy and the workplace toward un-
due focus on production at the expense of inquiry has undermined
writing labor’s potential. Yet the following section reveals aspects of
discursive formations that, even as they are heavily configured by pro-
duction rationales, nonetheless hold potential for rectifying this philo-
sophical wrong turn.

Professional Writing Experiences

That so many professional writers summoned distinctions between
professional and personal writing stems without doubt from many
influences, yet the earlier depictions of learning to write make it clear
that broad and deep discursive formations support a primary identifi-
cation with writing as singular activity. As the syntheses below dem-
onstrate, the workplace almost inevitably presents formations that
frame writing as just the opposite—as collective work requiring skills
and knowledge in extratextual domains.
     Bringing rhetorical skills and knowledge to other people’s texts.
Professional writers edit others’ work (Andrew, Chet, Corinne, Diane,
Ella, Ginger, Grace, Holly, Jackie, Jeff, Kyle, Leigh, Maggie, Mary,
Phoebe, Ravi) and find solutions to problems in the writing of others
(Jillian), at times conceiving of their own work as “translating” the
thoughts of others (Brenda) or even as a “soupmaker” (Anita).
     Managing projects from beginning to finish; multitasking; meet-
ing deadlines. Writers manage documents (Cass, Jeff) and give them
order (Sarah), effecting results (Diane), putting together “creative prod-
ucts or volumes” (Jackie), and overseeing projects from start to finish
(Brenda). They handle a variety of tasks and projects simultaneously
(Gloria, Helen, Kelly, Phoebe, Sarah, Tess), at times in large volume
(Kelly), and use many skills in doing so (Gwen, Leathe, Phoebe), all
the while meeting deadlines (Brenda, Daisy, Holly, Jeff, Mack, Nyck).
     Exercising various skills to complete writing projects. They must
be thorough (Gwen) and often must develop and exercise research skills
(Brenda, Cass, Gloria, Gwen, Kirsten) and interviewing skills, draw-
ing particularly on skills endemic to journalism (Adam, Brenda, Caro-
42   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


lyn, Daisy, Jackie, Kelly, Maggie, Marla, May, Nidean). They collabo-
rate (Carolyn, Corinne, Ginger, Joanne). They may have to learn new
skills on their own as they go (Maggie). In recent years, writers have
developed skills at integrating images and text (Adria, Ella, Jane,
Joanne, Mary).
     Exercising diplomacy. As they negotiate with content specialists,
they at times take the position of a “diplomat” (Joe); such a position
requires exhibiting patience and understanding (Gwen).
     Gleaning and achieving utilitarian ends through writing. Depend-
ing upon the local culture, writers might gain some organizational au-
tonomy through self-motivation and discipline (Gloria), and they might
use writing to innovate and experiment (Gloria). They may “generate
enthusiasm and public interest in an organization” (Kirsten), or they
may even see themselves as “in charge of the public image” (Albert).
     Teaching. Mack wrote that he enjoyed “telling stories to teach and
delight,” signaling the didactic element that often figures in professional
writing. Lee, a full-time teacher and writing center director, tapped her
perspective to enumerate a number of functions that writing serves:
to learn, to explain, to aid reading, to provide information, and to ex-
plore. Her comments reflect some of the insights to be taken by pro-
fessional writing theory and practice from composition, and Kelly cites
teaching composition explicitly as a part of her formative experience
leading to professional writing. That several of the researchers in this
book held backgrounds in teaching owes in part to the fact that they
were completing degrees in the teaching of writing and literature. Yet
just as the researchers cited above illustrate conceptual movements
from composition to workplace writing, so do other researchers fore-
cast movements in the opposite direction: Bernie, Cass, Daisy, Ella, and
Lisa, all currently professional writers, hope one day to teach. New
unities that might be composed from shards from these two fields are
explored in part three.
     Changing careers. As writers seek to become teachers and teach-
ers seek to become writers, several of the other researchers in this vol-
ume aim to change careers. Andrew and Lois enrolled in the MA pro-
gram to resituate writing as they resituated their careers. Jackie, though
certain she’d remain in “communications,” would like to explore dif-
ferent “arenas,” such as “technical writing, publishing, teaching, and
advertising copywriting”; Sarah was considering embarking on a
freelance career. Tess wrote of “finding her professional culture” in
which she could best exercise her writing. Though it is to be expected
                                                      WHAT IS A WRITER?   43


that participants in any degree program often envision a new career,
in this case the large percentage proves telling of the profession: post-
Fordist “flexibility” in labor expends those workers whose skills are
apparently the least difficult to replace. (Ana’s abstract is illustrative
in this respect.)

What Will Writers Be?
In the introduction I briefly traced the sea change in theoretical move-
ments and practices addressing “subjectivity” within the academy over
the last three decades of the century. This change was paralleled by
technological changes that reshaped the very conceptualization of
writing—from activities associated mostly with printed text and its
distribution to those associated with “volatile and interactive electronic
text[s]” (Lanham 11). As recently as 1993, when Challie undertook
her analysis of e-mail as an index of organizational climate, “writing”
was still seen in our culture largely as the final printed matter that
computers helped produce. Thus this archaeology reflects a particu-
larly transitional period in U.S. cultural understandings of what writ-
ing is and what a writer does.
     Given this shift, if we review the profiles of writers as represented
in this chapter and imagine their counterparts of the future, we will
no doubt see dramatic differences in their “formations” as writers.
From earliest ages, their forays into writing will be computer-mediated,
marked not only by the conceptual tools and pragmatic support that
computers offer but also by the networking among writers (and read-
ers) and the intertextuality that computers render complex and tanta-
lizing. The cultural power of narrative that captures would-be writers
will be funneled through new channels in addition to those of yore,
and the learning of writing will be enhanced exponentially by extra-
curricular forces and presences. (Scholastic preparation will differ dra-
matically, too, if the forecasts of researchers in Garay and Bernhardt’s
Expanding Literacies are even remotely on target.)
     The self as conceptualized in writing and as shaped through dis-
cursive forces will be subject to digitized influences. Intimate feelings,
noted by researchers in this archaeology as often formed and reformed
through entries into discourse, will in the future be shaped through
discursive entry that can interconnect with other selves and other feel-
ings instantly and across continents. The emotional reactions bound
up in writing and the exposure that one senses through writing will
44    WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


be shaped and sensed quite differently. The notions of “private” writ-
ing and “public/professional” writing will most certainly change, and
though digitized information and its flows will channel most of these
changes, discourse will remain at the core of what is happening, re-
gardless of the channels.
    The collective work that researchers in this volume describe as the
sine qua non of professional writing will undoubtedly develop in many,
many ways. Here the sea change in national economic reorientation
from high-volume to high-value still awaits widespread workplace re-
organization. (Sarmiento, quoted in Hull, claims that 95 percent of U.S.
companies still organize the workplace along Taylorist principles [14],
and his claim is echoed by the findings of researchers in this archaeol-
ogy.) The continuation of Taylorism in workplace cultures undercuts
the organization’s potential on a number of fronts, as noted by Johndan
Johnson-Eilola:

     Taylorism, however, always falls short of its goal of completely specify-
     ing and optimizing activities. Unlike easily reproducible mechanical parts
     of identical properties, people bring with them a broad range of abili-
     ties, attitudes, behaviors, and social relationships that resist integration
     into the machine. (Nostalgic Angels 228)

     Johnson-Eilola’s metaphor of the machine was chosen not only to
characterize workplace structures but also to remind us that the com-
puter’s current and future omnipresence in those structures requires
compositionists and their allies finally to investigate and teach writ-
ing with heightened reflexivity as concerns subjectivities produced
through machine-mediated composition.
     To help professional writers resist integration into the machine—
or rather, to reconfigure the status and purview of professional writ-
ers in organizations which will be compelled to change structures (and
hence metaphors)—we can take steps, theoretically and pragmatically,
to support the professional “class-in-formation,” as John Frow would
term it, of writers. Frow’s term will be developed in chapter 5; I use it
here to stress that because professional writers daily enact—and in-
deed, embody—composition tenets in organizational sites, it behooves
compositionists in particular to inspect the process of formation of this
class more closely. By 2006, according to the Bureau of Labor, 347,000
people will be employed as professional writers (table 2), and between
51 percent and 66 percent of them will be women, depending upon
the category of professional writer (table 11). These people will repre-
                                                     WHAT IS A WRITER?   45


sent composition tenets as we elaborate them and as we define them as
inextricably related to social movements such as feminism and others.
     As part of their self-assessments summarized in appendix B and
frequently in class discussions, researchers in this volume mentioned
skills and goals in the domain of the social. Gwen’s comment that she
“seeks a contribution to society” is illustrative. Yet currently these
writers’ possibilities for realizing this goal through professional writ-
ing proves limited, in part because reigning epistemologies of compo-
sition have colluded with Taylorized organizational structures to deny
professional writers a say in the social ends of organizational author-
ship. I use the term “authorship” both to return to Foucault’s ques-
tions about the legitimization of particular subjects’ purviews within
various institutionalized discourses and to recall the ways in which the
“author function” has systematically established realms of discursive
exclusivity, placing professional writing at the lower reaches of these
realms. I recall, too, the narratological framework from the previous
chapter that reminds us that every text carries an implied author re-
sponsible for the cultural norms and values undergirding it, another
realm of authorship to which professional writers contribute yet from
which they are usually excluded at the level of executive decisions.
     Andrea Lunsford adds another important issue as we ponder the
notion of “authorship” and the ways in which it has shaped our un-
derstandings of writers. She traces ways in which the theoretical cri-
tique of the sovereign author which opened the doors for imagining
new modes of composing has been dramatically countered in the digi-
tal age by the appropriation of “authorship” (and the rights to own-
ership) by the corporate world (“Rhetoric”). In the interest of control-
ling (and selling) access to information and knowledge under the aegis
of “intellectual property,” corporate legal teams answer the question
“What Is an Author?” with a resounding “us.” Because composition
tenets and practices during the twentieth century paved the way for
sundering writing from writers and their desires, values, and goals, the
fruits of such authorship customarily belong to those at the top of
Taylorized hierarchies or to those for whom they serve as agents. So
does the power to decide about writing’s effects in local cultures and
our larger culture.
     Lunsford argues for advancing rhetorical theory and practice that
promotes “alternative forms of agency and ways of owning that would
shift the focus from owning to owning up; from rights and entitlements
to responsibilities (the ability to respond) and answerability; from a
46   WRITERS IN THEORIES AND PRACTICES


sense of self as radically individual to the self always in relation” (535).
To enact such rhetorical theory and practice, she continues, “Scholars
of rhetoric and composition need to identify, theorize, and begin sys-
tematically practicing and teaching alternative forms of subjectivity and
alternative modes of ownership” (541). Using shards from archae-
ologies such as this, we can begin constructing theories that will not
only restore writers’ rightful places in alternative modes of ownership
but also investigate subjectivity based on empirical findings in work-
place cultures. Part two provides lengthy documentation to such ends.
PART TWO

Research on Discursive Work in
Organizational Settings (Uncovering Shards)
3   IN FIELDWORKPLACES: RESEARCHERS’
    SITES OF STUDY

    The foremost prospects and possibilities of auto-ethnography in
    anthropology at this time lie in the following: (1) the substantive
    and heuristic values of its diverse concepts and theories; (2) the
    ethical and moral issues it perpetually confronts with respect to
    the use of human subjects as sources of data; (3) the voices from
    within—the internal political affirmation of cultural diversity
    and autonomy for sometimes neglected populations and peoples;
    and (4) its potential advisory capabilities in programs of change
    or development.
                                —David Hayano, “Auto-Ethnography:
                                  Paradigms, Problems, and Prospects”

    Sometimes the starting point is the thing you’re most drawn to,
    or [chuckling] the thing you’re most repelled by [bringing
    laughter from the class] . . . the section of your work that you
    wonder about.
              —Professor Margaret “Peggy” Yocom, in class, 2/15/94




                                                                          49
50   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS




W    hen David Hayano sketched the possibilities for autoethnography
in 1979, he was addressing an audience composed primarily of anthro-
pologists. His goal, in part, was to dispel lingering positivist presump-
tions in anthropological thinking, which held that any member of a
culture was unable to mount an “objective” account of that culture’s
norms, values, ways of knowing, and the like, because that culture
member could not avoid being “subjective.” Hayano traced the first
appearance of the term “autoethnography” to a seminar in 1966 dur-
ing a discussion of Jomo Kenyatta’s 1938 study of his native Kikuyu
people. In denying scholarly status to Kenyatta’s account, positivism
had joined forces with the Eurocentrism that imbued much of the early
work in anthropology, which is particularly ironic in light of anthro-
pology’s methodologies aimed at surmounting ethnocentrism.
     I was led to research autoethnography because of the fieldwork
conducted by the researchers in this book. In 1993 I anticipated that
researchers would study workplace cultures foreign to them (and so
had prepared readings and prompted guest lecturers to address key
issues in representations of the Other), but most researchers, that year
and in the years since, chose to study their own cultures (77 percent).
Their decisions were driven by pragmatism, since fieldwork requires
so much time on site, yet by a stronger motive still: the desire to inves-
tigate some aspect of their writing work lives that they were most in-
trigued by—or most repelled by—to invoke folklorist Margaret Yo-
com’s prompt on research beginnings. And in the current theoretical
scene that has replaced positivism’s supposed “objectivity” with a “po-
sitioned subjectivity” on the part of the researcher, autoethnographic
projects remain as ripe with potential as they appeared to David Ha-
yano over two decades ago.
     In the realm of applied research, autoethnographic accounts of
workplace writing hold advisory capabilities for programs of change
or development, as will be seen throughout this book. Organizations
can draw on the analyses of professional writers that identify overlaps,
                                                   IN FIELDWORKPLACES   51


confluences, and barriers between writing processes and local cultural
processes, as can academic writing programs that prepare writers for
these jobs. These academic programs can likewise up the ante: the
“substantive and heuristic values of [autoethnography’s] diverse con-
cepts and theories” can invigorate academic programs by identifying
an array of cultural issues relevant to composition’s epistemologies,
issues that under the current-traditional paradigm are considered ex-
terior to composing processes. Those same cultural processes and writ-
ing processes, together with their overlaps and barriers, become com-
pelling sites of inquiry for compositionists and composers investigating
the formation of the subject via discursive processes. When we take
not only these processes but also the many shards turned up through
archaeological work as our material for synthesis and analysis, we can
enhance composition’s terrain—plotted impressively in recent years as
concerns race, gender, and ethnicity in subject formation—to include
empirical data on professional class formation via discursive work.
     In doing so, we might build upon the work in ethnic and national
identity formation associated with autoethnography as it has been
popularized in the discipline of English. Many readers are familiar with
Mary Louise Pratt’s 1991 essay “Arts of the Contact Zone,” in which
she used the term “autoethnography” to indicate “a text in which
people undertake to describe themselves in ways that engage with rep-
resentations others have made of them” (35), and in which she traced
a seventeenth-century Peruvian’s response to imperialist Spanish rep-
resentations of native South Americans. In the case of workplace eth-
nographies and the composition inquiries to be sparked by them, the
autoethnographies in this project describe writers in ways that engage
with given representations of writing as sets of essentially formal op-
erations and of writers as discursive functionaries. Such representations
are diametrically opposed to the rich views of writing represented in
the previous chapter, and one question that should compel all compo-
sitionists is that of the cultural processes and common understandings
that make for such reductionist representations. Surely part of our task
is to equip learning writers to do battle with these representations, at
the very least, and in better-case scenarios to dismantle the epistemolo-
gies undergirding them in our academic programs and curricula.
     Less familiar than Pratt’s account of autoethnography among those
in the discipline of English is that of Françoise Lionnet, who used the
term “autoethnography” to describe Zora Neale Hurston’s autobiog-
52   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


raphy Dust Tracks on the Road, because this text defined, by Lionnet’s
accounting, Hurston’s “subjective ethnicity” (383). Hurston was a
colorful figure, accomplished in both anthropological research (she
studied under Franz Boas) and fiction (Their Eyes Were Watching God,
first published in 1937, was reprinted in 1987 and now figures on
countless literature reading lists), who often melded these two discur-
sive traditions in her writing, and who, in bell hooks’s estimation
“broke new ground by pushing anthropological work across bound-
aries, giving it a place in mass culture, taking it back to the same space
from which African-American folklore had emerged” (143).
     Against the profiles of writers in chapter 2, Hurston’s writerly
identity proves tantalizing. Like Hurston, many of these professional
writers are engaged in writing fiction or creative nonfiction, impelled
by the strong bonds between writing and narrative that our larger
culture promotes, and like Hurston, many of them are equally driven
by a desire to intervene in social spheres via the instrument of their
writing. Unlike Hurston, their research in this project has to do less
with “subjective ethnicity” and more with something akin to “subjec-
tive work identity,” if we take the term “subjective” not as the oppo-
site of “objective” but rather as an update on this obfuscatory term.
In the pages that follow are shards on workplace writing identities,
establishing an initial inventory of writing practices and writers’ posi-
tions in organizations. As we ponder these shards, we can begin to see
the value of construing work sites as fieldwork sites and writers as
producers of knowledge on the imbrication of writing processes and
cultural processes.
     This initial inventory is based on appendix C, “Writers’ Work and
Positions by Nature of Organization,” which displays sites of research
in four categories: private businesses and corporations, government
agencies and institutions, professional associations and societies, and
educational and nonprofit institutions. As an inventory of sites, this
chapter thus provides baseline data on the array of professional writ-
ing positions that these particular researchers depicted in their analy-
ses. In many cases, writers’ positions in and of themselves were not
the foci for researchers’ ethnographies; rather, other topics and themes
became foci, with writers’ specific tasks and organizational positions
situated as part of the workplace within which local cultural processes
took form. This inventory alone might serve professional writers and
scholars of workplace writing as they reflect on their own circum-
                                                    IN FIELDWORKPLACES   53


stances against the array provided here and any individual examples
that might resonate with personal experience. Shorthand entries such
as “writing” or “editing” collapse a host of skills and knowledges, as
is demonstrated in chapters 4 and 5. Yet even these shorthand entries
imply larger complexities as one scans each table from site to site and
imagines the contrasts in discursive work as a function of audiences,
purposes, and nature of the tasks. The subject position of “reporter”
contrasts dramatically with that of “indexer,” for example, as we
imagine the discourses encountered in these respective jobs, colleagues
from other professional groups with whom writers interact, and the
nature of final discursive products coming from each organization.
     If we consider each table for “programs of development,” to in-
voke Hayano, these programs conceptualized at least in part to sup-
port writers in enhancing their subjective work identities as composi-
tion tenets and practices suggest, a number of reflexive practices that
writers might tactically employ emerge. I have suggested a few such
practices with each table by grouping certain researchers under um-
brella tactics that their work suggests, presented in bullet form. Then
drawing on composition tenets and practices, I have suggested some
preliminary implications for future work, coded by an arrow, like this:
→. Readers will no doubt discern a number of implications beyond
mine; I offer them to sketch the kind of synthesizing across sites that
archaeological work of this kind can promote. In many cases, the
syntheses that I offer with each table anticipate discussion to come in
later chapters.
     Finally, the chapter concludes with reflections over all four tables,
noting links between certain aspects of writers’ work and organiza-
tional positions across different kinds of organizations, qualifying my
own categories as the tables can be read not only with but against one
another, and once again sketching topics that will be treated more fully
later. In the spirit of this text conceived as an archaeology and as heed-
ing postmodern tenets in its enactments of intersubjective research, the
inventory of sites that follows is offered in the hope that it will pro-
vide readers with ideas for local applications in the classroom or the
workplace, that it will prompt readers to construct readings of spe-
cific researchers on their own through the abstracts and other tables,
and that through this baseline data on discursive practices and forma-
tions it will suggest possibilities for further collaboration among aca-
demics and practicing writers.
54       RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


Writers’ Work and Positions in Private Businesses and Corporations
Discussion of this first category of organization profits from distin-
guishing between small businesses and those of medium or large size.
Researchers analyzing organizations of fifteen persons or less, for
example, often found writers filling a “jack-of-all-trades” role as they
managed document drafting, cycling, review, and publication. Yet from
even the nine sites in this category, we can glean a number of discur-
sive endeavors, inflected not only by the size of the organization but
by the nature of the organization’s business and the other writing pro-
fessionals at work in them. Such was the case with Nancy and Ellie,
as they followed the evolution of a proposal to a school district to build
an addition to an existing secondary school. As a counterexample, Lois,
who focused on 3-D and virtual representation in a local unit of ten in
an organization of 300,000, observed high specialization in the writ-
ers’ work and interpersonal dynamics shaded less by workplace inti-
macy and more by the interplay between organizational position and
professional personas. As one scans the table, an impressive array of
writing projects and subtasks takes form, their complexities faintly dis-
cernible when writers’ organizational positions along with those of
other professional groups are imagined.
     From this initial inventory of writers’ work and positions in small
and large businesses, aided by researchers’ abstracts, we can imagine
tactics that writers and scholars of professional writing might consider
further to enhance writers’ subjective work identities, as follows:
     Independents and Small Organizations (less than fifteen people)
     •   Tracking protean job duties and expectations (Ann, Nancy and Ellie)
            → formulating log and journal entries, other self-documentation
     •      Monitoring interplay between official organization position and lo-
            cal cultural position (Ann, Nancy and Ellie)
            → framing journal entries; undertaking studies in organizational stud-
            ies and social psychology
     •      Teaching (Ann, Janice, Nidean, Sarah)
            → teaching as an outside consultant to the organization or as a lan-
            guage expert teaching other culture members
     •      Learning various skills in the full cycle of writing and publications
            processes (Ann, Chet, Mack, Nancy and Ellie, Nidean)
            → learning to learn; conceptualizing performance as a function of
            other players’ positions within and with respect to local culture (e.g.,
            as when functioning as a liaison to the exterior, representing clients
            to a public or representing the organization to clients)
                                                       IN FIELDWORKPLACES   55


   •   Finding a niche as an independent (Mack, Sarah)
       → developing knowledge in a specialty field and remaining current;
       developing a clientele and maintaining or expanding it; developing
       skill at long-distance interaction with the local culture through points
       of contact

   Larger Organizations (fifteen or more people)
   •    Scrutinizing writing duties in the context of the larger organization
       (Adam, Adria, Carolyn, Lois, Mary, May, Meg, Nyck, Ravi, Starla)
       → expanding job duties in tandem with organization dynamics
   •   Juxtaposing 3-D and virtual representation (Adria, Albert, Lois)
       → judging when and how to muster virtual representation; monitor-
       ing the interplay between face-to-face interaction and written inter-
       action
   •   Calculating self-representation as a function of both organization
       position and players (Leathe, Lois, May, Starla)
       → learning the personalities of organization players; learning the local
       norms governing self-representation up and down the organization
   •   Studying and learning organization subcultures (Adria, Carolyn, Jeff,
       Joanne, Joe, Lisa, May, Rex, Tess)
       → approaching other divisions of the organization as cultures to be
       learned in order to coordinate work and teaching; contextualizing
       writing and editing teams within the larger organization
   •   Developing skill in one aspect of writing and publications processes
       as configured by local culture (Elaine, Ella, Ginger, Jen, Jeff, Joe,
       Lisa, Nyck, May, Red, Rex, Starla)
       → revisiting writing tasks that are already familiar (such as abstract-
       ing) as the demands of local organizations reconfigure them
   •   Reflecting on the local organization (and division) in the national
       context (Adria, Carolyn, Joanne, Joe, Jeff, Leathe, Lois, Meg, Ravi,
       Red, Starla, Tess)
       → knowing the history of a field of writing such as journalism within
       an industry such as the newspaper industry; or of an organizational
       entity such as communications divisions
   •    Anticipating turnover (Adria, Holly, Tess)
       → studying broad cultural trends in the workforce; preparing for
       new writing exigencies in the workplace of the future
   •   Employing World Wide Web rhetorics (Adria, Gary, Meg)
       → learning Web composing and linking as discursive formations and
       practices extending across cultures and grounded in business rhetorics

    Because the preliminary tactics as I’ve sketched them above are
grounded in composition tenets and practices, the use of journals and
logs is summoned several times. This practice in composition class-
56   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


rooms, usually configured as providing writers an expressive venue
alongside transactional compositions, in this context holds new po-
tential—as a tool to monitor individual parts in collective and cultural
action. This potential will be borne out in later chapters and discus-
sions of researchers’ foci on self-documentation.
     The suggestions for additional studies are directed towards students
preparing for careers as writers, for career writers undertaking further
studies, and for curriculum designers. Similarly, the observations on
teaching remind us that this oft-overlooked skill is frequently employed
by writers in organizational settings—from formal instruction to brief
interactions over texts. One implication is that writers who have for-
mal experience as teachers might rethink this experience in terms of
professional skills and qualifications; another is that students and in-
structors might configure student class presentations with this future
workplace subjectivity in mind. “Learning to learn” and “conceptu-
alizing performance with respect to other players” likewise evoke
course design and classroom activities, and are included here to reflect
current workplace realities and anticipate realities to come in the con-
text of the national economy, a theme rejoined in later chapters.
     Developing knowledge in a specialty field speaks to active writers
and students and represents another twist on writing across the cur-
riculum, all the while reminding us that writing instruction divorced
from writers’ field interests might fall short of its empowering poten-
tial. Developing skill in long-distance interaction with workplace cul-
tures anticipates writers’ positions to come and emphasizes the need
to develop organizational acuity as well as rhetorical and technologi-
cal acuity. This organizational acuity should include the scrutiny of
writers’ duties in the context of the larger organization, to eschew the
subject position of passive agent and to aid in conceptualizing not only
writing but writing positions as process, too. By so doing, writers who
learn the norms governing representation up and down the organiza-
tion may be more politically astute in manifesting their ideological
positions on organizational products and claiming their share of au-
thority in organizational life. Representation of writers within the or-
ganization (a topic developed in chapter 7) will take many forms in
the future, virtuality among these forms, which prompts writers and
scholars alike to take electronic media not only as tool but also as
material for inquiry in our writing instruction.
     Finally, the suggestion that writers strive to locate their local or-
ganization in its umbrella national industry and to learn the histories
                                                   IN FIELDWORKPLACES   57


behind this industry and/or specific organizational divisions (such as
communications) is offered to bolster writers both ideologically and
materially. Knowing the larger context enables writers to position them-
selves and fellow workers on fundamental workplace issues (as dem-
onstrated in chapters 4 and 5), and studying the national economy and
trends can help professional writers anticipate new directions for work
in a high-turnover field. I have listed only three researchers as those
whose work suggests this category of high turnover, but the work his-
tories of professional writers confirm serial employment as the trend.
Holly and Tess are listed because both of these researchers lost their
jobs during the course of their research, driving home the reality of
writers as replaceable laborers for all members of the class.

Writers’ Work and Positions in Government Agencies and Institutions
Two of the most frequently cited elements of writers’ work in govern-
ment agencies and institutions are collaborating to produce collective
reports and composing in elaborate review processes across divisions
and up the hierarchy. Branden observed elaborate review and cycling
of documents in the Department of Commerce as various writers col-
laborated to produce final reports, as did Liz in the World Bank. Other
researchers noted some of the particularities in managing such com-
posing across divisions (Gloria focused on input from several divisions
in composing a letter from the Library of Congress to a citizen) and
up the hierarchy (George investigated writing and reading as part of
the military’s “chop chain” review).
    Writers in the government need knowledge of government struc-
tures and the dynamics that figure as part of them: the writers in Cass’s
study needed to know as much about the intricacies of government
contracting as they did about the subject of the contract. For writers
linked with the military (as many government writers are, directly or
indirectly), familiarity with and understanding of military procedures
and mind-set also seems a valuable skill, as does an understanding of
political rhetoric. Amid these understandings and knowledge must fig-
ure acuity in envisioning the public as audience quite often, discern-
ing the forms that discourse will take as it moves through many layers
towards ultimate end users.
    Perhaps more so than in the private sector, the work of writers and
editors in government positions entails coordinating composing be-
tween headquarters and field offices. Similarly, the writing of policy
58       RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


and procedures proves more prevalent in writers’ work, at least in this
data set. Researchers identified two kinds of writers’ work that surely
recur in other kinds of organizations: writing in the mundane forms
to sustain daily office functioning (Gwen spoke of purchase orders and
administrative renewals) and composing on the World Wide Web.
    Some syntheses across these sites and some preliminary tactics for
other writers and scholars based on these positions and writers’ work
are the following:
     •       Collaborating to produce collective reports (Anita, Branden, Liz)
            → tracking contributions of others and of oneself; learning collabo-
            rative production skills such as group maintenance
     •      Composing in elaborate review processes across divisions and up
            and down the hierarchy (Ana, Branden, Cass, George, Gloria, Jane,
            Kali, Liz, Rachel)
            → tracking contributions; learning local chains of command and
            persons occupying positions; incorporating reader-response theory
            into composing processes for writers in the chain
     •      Contending with political discourse (Kolar, Leigh)
            → studying political discourse rhetorically for the ways in which it
            positions senders and receivers of messages; studying this rhetoric
            against backdrop of specific organizational cultures
     •      Envisioning the public as audience (Branden, Gloria, Jane, Ray)
            → charting the routing of documents as they move from inception to
            ultimate readers; reading documents for the politics that shaped them,
            perhaps by tracing successive drafts; informing conceptualization of
            this kind of composing through research in technical writing on user
            advocacy
     •      Coordinating composing between centers of power and the periph-
            ery (Helen, Sue)
            → studying the flow of information between headquarters and field
            offices for the ways in which it reproduces and changes local culture
     •      Composing and being subject to policy-and-procedures writing
            (Brenda, Ray)
            → studying policy-and-procedures writing as a genre, not only learn-
            ing forms and conventions but also discerning cultural norms and
            values
     •      Composing writing that sustains office functioning (Gwen)
            → developing organizational knowledge through the cultural spot-
            analysis that these tasks permit
     •      Employing World Wide Web rhetorics (Albert)
            → learning Web composing and connecting as discursive formations
            and practices extending across cultures
                                                     IN FIELDWORKPLACES   59


     Several of the preliminary implications listed above with each point
resonate with implications drawn for writers currently working or en-
visioning work in private businesses and corporations. Tracking con-
tributions by oneself and others to collectively authored reports clearly
dovetails with the suggestion made in the previous section for tracking
protean job duties through journals or logs. Learning local chains of
command not just from the perspective of position in these chains but
also from the perspective of these chains as displaying aspects of organ-
izational culture can enable writers to improve their writing and per-
haps improve the local culture: the suggestion to incorporate reader re-
sponse theory into composing and review processes comes from George’s
own suggestions in his study of ghostwriting in the military (discussed
at length in our coauthored essay “Workplace Ghostwriting”).
     Writers who envision government writing positions surely will
want to study political discourse, to render themselves more astute
when composing within this discourse, whether to realize personal
goals within the organization (as in the cases of cabinet speechwriters
in Leigh’s study) or to take stock of their own reluctance to justify du-
bious composing practices by final results (as in Kolar’s study of Sen-
ate press office writers fabricating letters from constituents). Similarly,
these writers will want to study composing for an audience that is often
the public, distanced from composers through layers and levels of col-
lective authorship. This is no small topic, requiring background read-
ing in case studies or archival work in specific organizations that traces
the evolution of documents as shaped by political forces. To inform
this topic has come recent theory and research on writers as end-user
advocates (Sullivan and Porter; Slack, Miller, and Doak).
     As coordinators of composing between headquarters and field
offices, writers and editors might want to note that their work serves
not only document production but also cultural production and repro-
duction, a topic rejoined in chapters 5 and 8. Similarly, writers in or-
ganizations are always implicated by policies and procedures that dis-
cursively define aspects of the local culture and subjectivities within
it, suggesting that writers envisioning work in any organization study
this genre at some point.
     Finally, like many other classes of professionals, writers may per-
form a number of mundane writing tasks to serve office functioning.
In such organizational positions, writers might use these tasks to in-
form themselves more fully on structures and players in the local or-
ganizational culture. Web composing, too, will probably eventually fall
60       RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


into the category of mundane tasks, yet writers and aspiring writers
now will do well to study the rhetorics of the Web as they evolve, af-
fecting not only individual writers and their local culture but subjec-
tivities wrought by our larger culture, too.

Writers’ Work and Positions in Professional Associations and Societies
Writers and editors in associations and societies are invariably located
in communications divisions or media relations departments, which
underscores parallels with writers in the organizations previously re-
viewed. In contrast to writers in such divisions and departments in the
private sector and in many government positions, though, writers’
work lives in associations generally seem more constrained. Because
the raison d’être of these organizations is narrowly configured (they
exist solely to inform their constituents and to lobby Congress) and
because frequently the decision-making staff in these organizations are
comprised of people with experience in the specific industry, writers
and editors are usually occupied with coordinating and manipulating
other people’s texts. Writers have few occasions to initiate and actual-
ize projects of their own (Jackie and Kyle being the exceptions in this
data set), and writing cultures often position their discourse workers
as functionaries at the association’s service (a topic addressed in chap-
ters 4 and 5). This said, a synthesis of positions and writers’ work with
implications for other writers and scholars is as follows:

     •      Editing and composing monthly informational updates and topical
            articles (in the genres of newsletter or association magazine) for a
            clearly defined audience (Bernie, Brenda, Heather, Itsy, Jackie, Jan,
            Karla, Kirsten, Kyle, Lena, Mandy)
            → developing research skills on specific industry topics and monitor-
            ing broader cultural events for their implications; learning publish-
            ing within monthly deadlines
     •      Editing brochures and books marketed to constituents (Diane) or
            the public (Corinne)
            → honing editing skills in a narrowly defined niche by interpreting
            editorial decisions in light of past publications and current member-
            ship demographics; embodying a personage or cultural values in public
            relations materials
     •      Reviewing, selecting, and editing contributions from constituents for
            publication in association magazine (Bernie, Brenda, Kirsten, Kyle,
            Lena)
                                                        IN FIELDWORKPLACES   61


        → studying the industry and the constituency to discern most impor-
        tant topics and treatment of them; elaborating organizational pur-
        view somewhat through these skills
    •   Working in a communications division in an organization whose sole
        function is to lobby Congress (Bernie, Jan)
        → honing skills in editing, studying the history of the industry, learn-
        ing as many skills as possible
    •   Doing the graphics work for association publications (Challie)
        → learning desktop publishing in as many platforms as possible; study-
        ing the interrelationships between text and visuals
    •   Using e-mail to coordinate projects (Challie, Jackie, Kirsten)
        → developing judgment in e-mail use; reading e-mail not only as
        informational but also as a reflection of the culture

     Perhaps because researchers in the Cultures of Professional Writ-
ing course have cast their own employment with associations as short-
term, many of the implications drawn above suggest using the organi-
zational position to develop as much transportable skill and knowledge
as possible. To that end writers might seize the opportunities presented
by the organization and educate themselves in publishing along monthly
deadlines. Similarly, even if writers and editors do not envision long-
term work with the same industry, they might want to develop research
skills on industry topics that would transfer. Work on book projects
produced by an association would present a similar opportunity and
from a perspective that many publishers do not enjoy: a ready-made
market with demographic information on that market easily at hand.
     As for coordinating submissions from constituents for publication
in the organization magazine, similar implications have been drawn:
by studying the industry and constituency to discern most topical is-
sues, editors develop a skill they can take elsewhere. This position of
coordinating manuscripts from the field clearly parallels that held by
Helen and discussed in the previous section. Just as Helen might con-
strue editing as producing and reproducing culture, so might editors
so engaged in associations, even though their say in this shaping prob-
ably is less.
     Challie stands as a bit of an anomaly in this data set, since she worked
as graphics expert in her association rather than as writer or editor.
Yet when her position is considered alongside earlier implications for
writers to accumulate diverse skills in organizational authorship, it
encourages the learning of desktop publishing in many platforms and
studying document design theory and research particularly for the
62   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


insights on relationships between text and images. (Challie’s focus in
her research was on e-mail as an index of local culture and is discussed
at greater length in chapter 5. Using e-mail to coordinate projects, now
a workplace commonplace, was only beginning to take hold in 1993.
Its currency today reflects just one rapid transformation of writing pro-
cesses as imbricated with cultural processes.).
     As final exceptions that perhaps confirm the rule, the work of
Jackie and Kyle as editors for association magazines was by their
accounts challenging and provocative. Kyle’s was filled with opportu-
nities to initiate and carry through his own projects, including com-
posing imaginative and entertaining articles on industry issues. He ad-
mitted in individual conference that part of his creativity came from
using an otherwise chaotic local culture with high turnover to stoke
his creativity, as discussed in chapter 5. Jackie addressed in her eth-
nography the tugs she felt from her training as a journalist as she ed-
ited an association magazine and weighed content for its newswor-
thiness as compared with promotional discourse. Such tugs between
various discursive traditions and writers’ organizational mandates are
addressed at greater length in chapters 4 and 5.

Writers’ Work and Positions in Educational and Nonprofit Institutions
In a sense, this category of sites draws together the most heterogenous
writing activities: teachers currently working in classrooms or writing
centers, writing with and to students, to parents, and to administra-
tion; administrators writing both to represent their unit up the hierar-
chy and to collaborate in governance within the hierarchy; professional
writers engaged in representing the institution to various audiences,
through a variety of publications; writing scholars corresponding with
one another in a virtual culture; and staff engaged in the daily running
of support offices in an educational institution or a nonprofit institu-
tion. In the case of teachers, this research offered the occasion to step
back from their day-to-day work with students and inspect their writ-
ing and other aspects of communication within local cultures whose
primary mission is education. Other researchers looked at subcultures
such as a publications office or university relations department that
bear close resemblance to writing cultures in the private domain. Teach-
ers’ ethnographies spark us to renew our understandings of educators’
work as it represents another form of “professional writing,” and re-
searchers in publications offices and the like prompt us to consider
                                                       IN FIELDWORKPLACES   63


subtle differences in writers’ work and positions in these locations com-
pared with work in the private sphere. A synthesis of positions and work
across all sites, with implications for tactics, yields the following:
    •    Representing the organization to former members and prospective
        members (Hart, Kelly), or to members and nonmembers (Alice, An-
        drew, Emma, Kelly, Lara, Marla, Megan)
        → developing skills in interpreting demographics as part of audience
        considerations; developing skills at appealing to multiple audiences
        simultaneously; using serially multiple audiences to inform reflexivity
    •   Documenting and representing a unit’s work to vie for money and
        support for development (Lee, Megan)
        → developing acuity simultaneously in local organizational politics
        and in national theoretical and pragmatic trends; representing work
        up the hierarchy; studying the “genres” of solicitation and acknowl-
        edgment
    •    Communicating with extraorganizational educators in a virtual cul-
        ture (Jillian)
        → infusing local cultural knowledge with knowledge culled from a
        national and virtual culture
    •    Administering governance of the organization (Tom)
        → managing representations and documentation across the culture
        and up and down cultural hierarchies
    •   Composing writing that sustains office and organization functioning
        (Emma, Phoebe)
        → developing organizational knowledge through the cultural spot-
        analysis that these tasks permit
    •   Teaching writing (Alice, Anne, Julie, Kate, Marla)
        → discerning parallels between teaching formally as an occupation
        and teaching informally as a professional writer; alternatively, for
        teachers, devising shifts in practices when one’s work is construed as
        professional writing

    Like writers in associations and societies, writers in these educa-
tional and nonprofit institutions who represent the institutions to vari-
ous audiences need to develop skills at interpreting demographics to
appeal to multiple audiences, simultaneously or serially. One imagines
course design in classroom contexts that incorporates composing ex-
ercises attempting such audience appeals; professional writers might
review their own portfolios with this aspect in mind as it constitutes a
valuable yet easily overlooked skill. (During her research, Megan con-
ducted archival research on rhetoricians’ analyses of “vague dis-
course.”) For practicing teachers, the appeals that they make serially
64   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


to their students, students’ parents, and administration might be used
as source in sketching some discursive features of the local culture, to
be used for renewal and development, culturally and individually.
     Perhaps more so than their counterparts in the three kinds of sites
mentioned earlier, educators vying for funds and support in their or-
ganizations often have little experience or guidance in accomplishing
this task within their local cultures. Developing acuity in local organi-
zational politics clearly is required, and keeping abreast of national
trends provides warranting for projects. (Dialogue with extraorgani-
zational educators via virtual culture appears a powerful and promis-
ing practice to aid such work.) Like their counterparts in the other kinds
of sites, writers in these educational and nonprofit settings also engage
regularly in the mundane writing of office management, but unlike their
counterparts these writers may engage in governance of the organiza-
tion. In this data set only one researcher (Tom) studied this aspect of
writers’ work, in his case tracing the subtle shifts in the wording of a
memo composed by the college senate president when addressed up
or across the hierarchy. Tom (like his classmate Phoebe who focused
on writers’ memos in a nonprofit) was surprised at the lack of experi-
ence evidenced in the memos he studied, which will probably resonate
with college educators who must learn administrative and hierarchi-
cal writing on the job with no prior training. One might review cur-
ricula in rhetoric and composition, and other fields, with this in mind.
     Finally, construing educators’ writing to students, colleagues, par-
ents, and other audiences as forms of professional writing suggests once
again the potential that lies in formally articulating hidden skills and
knowledge that teachers as writers bring to bear on writing projects;
professional writers in other spheres might study teachers’ writing for
local applications. For teachers who envision a lifelong career in the
profession, reconsidering one’s work as professional writing can per-
haps lend new perspective on one’s individual practice as circumscribed
by the local culture of the school.

Writers’ Work, Fieldwork, and Subjective Work Identities:
Syntheses from Shards
This inventory of writers’ work and positions in eighty-three organi-
zations enables some preliminary syntheses across the data set. For
professional writers, writing projects are almost always collaborative,
engaging coworkers from other professional classes, entailing multiple
                                                      IN FIELDWORKPLACES   65


reviews, and often targeting multiple (and sequential) audiences (which
might include themselves as citizens), fraught with second-guessing on
issues of organizational representation above and beyond a document’s
ostensible “content,” requiring interpretations of organizational cul-
tures to the ends of adequately and appropriately delivering discursive
products. On the job, writers may find themselves the lone “writer”
in the organization, they may work in teams of like-minded writers
and editors, they may find themselves in organizations as populous as
big cities, or they may figure as communications emissaries to other
divisions, which are inevitably shaded by an organization’s history and
an industry’s history. Their work may be highly constrained in its rep-
resentational dimensions; in many cases this work could constitute an
ongoing portfolio of discursive skills and knowledge that are subject
to updating in a high-turnover profession that requires ever-increas-
ing knowledge of software platforms and digital rhetorics connected
with writers’ work. Unlike their colleagues from other professions,
though, writers enter the workforce with precious little preparation
for such arenas and few tactics for defending and enhancing their pro-
fessional status in manners similar to other professions. And as long
as popular conceptions of writing as purely formal and writers as dis-
cursive functionaries who do not contribute to the content of an
organization’s deliverables prevail, writers’ lots are not likely to change.
     One way to envision change, to reconfigure popular understand-
ing of writing in ways commensurate with recent theories of discourse
and subject formation, to unleash the potential of writing for organi-
zations, their constituents, and their audiences, is to conceptualize all
discursive work sites as potential fieldworkplaces. To deconstruct re-
ductionist understandings of writing wrought by composition’s past
epistemologies, we can begin with the simple precept that because
writing constitutes as well as reflects realities, writers’ work must en-
tail reflexivity on the whys and wherefores of such constitution—as
we talk about writers’ work and as we teach writers even the rudiments.
     As we draw on scholarly fields and disciplines to aid us in recon-
figuring misunderstandings of writing, ethnography is undeniably a
primary source, as is folklore. Particularly promising in folklore is its
long-standing object of study—the lore of folks—which in subjective
work identities always figures strongly. Indeed, so much academic
research on organizational culture seeks to render visible the invisible
knowledges that circulate informally among workers. Also promising
is folklore’s embracing of reflexivity in fieldwork methodology: Pro-
66   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


fessor Yocom’s comment in the chapter epigraph might at first blush
appear whimsical, yet she pits her felt sense of attractive or repelling
phenomena against rigorous fieldwork methodology in order to pro-
duce knowledge of those phenomena which holds sway in both social
science circles and in English circles. Like Zora Neale Hurston, she
melds discursive practices from these two fields to produce represen-
tations adequate to her site, her respondents, her self, and her profes-
sional discipline of folklore. Not only does such an approach, through
its open acknowledgment of the researcher’s inevitable part in research,
reinforce the principle of positioned subjectivity as a methodological
touchstone, it also frees one to address conditions of work that might
not have appeared valid topics within a positivist framing of research
and writing.
     The professional writers represented in this book take to folklore’s
questions and methods quite easily, and many who have read Hurston’s
fiction, moreover, are delighted to encounter her in another discursive
realm. Ultimately, this resonance may presage more than individual
empowerment, if indeed writers and their academic collaborators can
begin construing writing workplaces as fieldworkplaces. For even as
the reflexivity learned and exercised as part of such fieldwork may
inform programs of change and development, so this reflexivity may
lead further, to broader questions of subjective work identity. Writing
on the future of folklore and the questions remaining for this field to
confront, Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett says, “what colonialism is to
the history of anthropology, nationalism is to the study of folklore”
(143). Because professional writers are a class of workers made pos-
sible by specific composition epistemologies that dovetailed with na-
tional economic formation, as argued in the introduction and chapter
2, these writers (and scholars in their fields) may ultimately have to
confront the ways in which the writing of workplace cultures contin-
ues to sustain forms of nationalism that in an ever-shrinking digitized
world prove counterproductive. But that confrontation will lie some-
where down the road, once writers have been empowered as a profes-
sional class by virtue of their understandings of cultural production
via writing in organizational sites.
     In the meantime, a formidable task lies before writers and schol-
ars learning from their work: to bring academic understandings of
subjectivity and lived workplace realities together for a greater under-
standing of subjective work identities. Says Patti Lather: “a discursive
focus on networks of practices which constitute subjects in shifting,
                                                  IN FIELDWORKPLACES   67


multiple, contradicting sites constructs a more complex understand-
ing of identity and citizenship” (42). The shifting and multiple sites
that constitute writing subjects in workplace cultures can speak vol-
umes about writerly identities and writers’ purviews as citizens within
organizational contexts. The next chapter presents shards in this sec-
tor of the dig.
4   ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF
    WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES

    Although we might want to be cautious in recognizing it as
    such, the corporation, certainly the organization, has become
    the major arena for public life for the individual in modern
    Western civilization.
                          —Mary Beth Debs, “Corporate Authority”

    It is remarkable how little most of us understand the relationship
    between power, knowledge, and organizations. It is time that we
    give up the faith that the goal of communication is always clarity
    and brevity. In practice, the politics of organizations and
    organizational politics have as their goals limiting, obscuring, or
    hiding information.
         —Jennifer Daryl Slack, David James Miller, and Jeffrey Doak,
                            “The Technical Communicator as Author”

    Thus we all seem like fish swimming in a corporate sea full of
    bits and pieces of jumbled information floating all around us.
    But the actual snagging of those snippets of information is not
    easy and frequently involves asking a lot of questions and
    attempting to make deductions based on observations.
                                           —Starla, final ethnography




                                                                          69
70   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS




M   ary Beth Debs’s 1993 caution in recognizing organizations as the
major arena for public life for the individual seems increasingly un-
needed with each passing year, as technological processes accelerate
cultural processes in ways that bypass collective public scrutiny of years
past (Virilio) and as student subjectivities, formerly lived prior to and
fairly discrete from work lives, become increasingly protracted and
integrated into the requirements for workplace performance at func-
tionary and even middle-management echelons. Because workers must
augment the qualifications bestowed by earlier schooling—whether at
the high school, baccalaureate, or even postgraduate levels—those at
the lower levels of organizational charts find less and less time for the
public lives associated with earlier models of citizenry, even as many
of the organizations employing them exercise more and more influ-
ence on the polity’s leisure and civic purview through the lobbying that
drives political policy. This situation argues from yet another perspec-
tive for the value of autoethnographic work in writers’ workplace cul-
tures, since such work might support collective action within the or-
ganization or at the very least render individual writers more conscious
of their real purview (as contrasted with that indicated on an organi-
zation chart) in these major arenas for public life.
     The comments of scholars Slack, Miller, and Doak echo inquiry
from many sectors of the humanities aimed implicitly at enriching the
analysis of work-life subjectivities, in their case by a focus on author-
ship in the cultural and sociological planes and on so-called instrumen-
tal discourse as it constitutes local realities, which are otherwise in-
flected by power and knowledge articulated to diverse agendas and
agents. To explore the workings of these agendas and agents in orga-
nizational arenas, the petits recits such as Starla provides prove valu-
able as empirical records against which to balance claims from theo-
retical realms and to imagine strategies in the light of them. Strategies
for writing scholars and practicing writers collaborating with them are
developed fully in part three; in this chapter they remain purposely
                     ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   71


inchoate so that readers might ponder the shards herein according to
their own theoretical bents and pragmatic needs.
     At the same time, the chapter builds on the archaeological inven-
tory of writers’ positions and work provided in chapter 3: the “given”
nature of workplace writing cultures provided by the earlier inventory
are in this chapter problematized by analyzing the imbrication of or-
ganizational processes and writing processes. The bases for this analy-
sis are the themes and topics explored by researchers in their workplace
writing ethnographies. For most of these researchers, this occasion to
document and analyze their workplace cultures—armed with the
methodological tools to mount such an analysis and a forum of like-
minded practicing writers—was a novel experience that provided
them with the first occasion to take stock of the organizational struc-
tures and processes among which they worked. The themes and top-
ics they explored were many, as indicated in appendix B and implied
in the abstracts in appendix D. In this chapter I have drawn on the
full ethnographies and class discussions of them to mount a database
of organizational features explored by researchers. This database is
represented by lists in each of the following sections, which group
themes and topics under umbrella headings. Classifying researchers’
work has been an arduous task, since their analyses invariably devel-
oped topics and themes in varying degrees and with frequent navigat-
ing between organizational issues and discursive issues. I have tried
to be faithful to what seemed to be researchers’ primary intentions,
based not only on their written ethnographies but also on class dis-
cussions and individual conferences. In some cases these intentions
seemed to be several and hence certain researchers appear in more than
one category.
     From the perspective of readers’ usability, I see this multiple cat-
egorization as a boon, since it offers additional shards of researchers’
work in this collective dig, allowing a fuller representation of each re-
searcher to take form for readers and, hopefully, prompting more con-
nections with other local cultures. Connections between empirical data
and theory, and among writing cultures, can equip practicing writers
and collaborating scholars with the grounding for something akin to
“cognitive mapping” as suggested by Fredric Jameson, in which a
subject’s specific local, historic, and economic circumstances are linked
to more global professional class structures in which he or she is im-
plicated (415–16), thus offsetting the limited capacities for effecting
72    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


change grounded only in the petits recits. From the organizational
features explored in this chapter, we can begin mapping at the very least
some recurrent dynamics between individual writers and organiza-
tions, dynamics of collective procedures and writing, and writers’ prac-
tices with respect to organizational goals. To aid this mapping, I have
summarized trends and patterns for each of the following sections. In
the conclusion to the chapter, these trends and patterns are synthesized
for the inquiries they suggest and for development in later chapters.

Dynamics Between the Individual and the Organization
This category arose because many researchers crafted ethnographies
around their own work or another individual’s work they observed
against the backdrop of organizational structures or practices. Ethno-
graphies of this kind tended to focus on writers themselves in a local
cultural context as opposed to those analyses that focused on whole
document processes or broader cultural dynamics and the ways that
discursive work interrelated with these dynamics or with ultimate
organizational goals. The fact that several researchers appear in more
than one category underscores the ways in which their development
of a particular topic would introduce new themes, which in turn might
suggest a new topic, etc. Readers may want to consult this section in
tandem with chapter 3, “In Fieldworkplaces,” since many of the or-
ganizational positions and work of writers represented there connect
explicitly with this section. As is immediately clear upon scanning the
table, moreover, this section has implications for writers’ expertise in
organizational authorship, suggesting curriculum design and course
work in preparation for it; these implications are addressed in part
three.

Writers’ Skills

As all professional writers know, the skills they put to use in their daily
discursive work often far outstrip their representation in job titles. Per-
haps because researching professional writing as part and parcel of a
local culture prompts a complex understanding of individual talents
such as “skills,” topics and themes in researchers’ ethnographies re-
vealed a number of aspects of writing skills that illustrate facets of day-
to-day workplace subjectivities, as illustrated by the following list:
                          ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES     73


Writers’ Skills                                  Researcher
captioning                                       Rex
coding entries                                   Norma
composing vague discourse                        Megan
constructing and maintaining                     Adria, Albert, Gary, Leathe, Meg
     World Wide Web pages
converting data to narrative                     Leathe, Nancy and Ellie
developing professionally through tasks          Adria, Gloria, Joanne, Red
designing documents                              Adria, Nidean
editing engineers’ proposals                     Jeff
enforcing formats and standards                  Kirsten, Sue
fabricating letters                              Kolar
finding and sustaining a niche as freelancer     Sarah
framing questions to authors as editor           Helen, Kyle
gaining clients                                  Janice, Ravi, Sarah
learning organization history . . . as           Grace
     manuscript coordinator
. . . as organization history writer             Elaine
mastering jargon (“Bankese”)                     Liz
mining metaphors                                 Leigh
self-documenting                                 Gwen, Meg, Ray
teaching writing as writing center tutor         Kate
using organization culture to stoke creativity   Kyle

    Leigh developed a theme of “mining metaphors” when she shad-
owed a cabinet speechwriter drawing metaphors systematically from
the current secretary’s past, from the administration’s positions on
relevant issues, and from popular discourse, then assembling these
metaphors within conventions appropriate to the occasion of the
speech. Megan analyzed the parameters of “vague discourse” in memo-
randa of agreement between a university foundation and its donors
as these agreements enabled the disbursing of funds with a flexibility
deemed appropriate by both parties. Gloria’s theme of professional
development noted how librarian researchers often used assignments
to broaden their expertise, providing the individual with varied work
and the organization with ever-developing employees, thus tracing a
provocative interplay between local culture and culture members’
subjectivities within the larger topic of representing the library through
correspondence. Both Helen and Kyle sketched themes of organiza-
tional culture influencing the ways that editors framed their discussions
with authors, and Grace similarly recognized the organizational
culture’s history holding import for her discussions with authors as
manuscript coordinator. Kyle spoke of using the at-times-chaotic lo-
cal culture to his own ends to stoke playfulness and creativity.
74    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


     If these and the other entries in this table are synthesized to draw
observations on recurrent subjectivities lived by writers while honing
skills in organizational authorship, one recognizes (at least) the fol-
lowing issues:

     • When converting data to narrative and when narrating in other
     specialized writing tasks such as captioning, letter writing, and the
     like, writers compose implied authors who embody cultural norms
     and values, with these writers’ subjectivities bound up in these
     norms and values as they compose.
     • Working with other people’s metaphors and with multiple con-
     tingencies in producing writing in a specialized genre (such as a
     speech) may require a suspension of personal values in the service
     of the organization.
     • Contrary to stock admonitions in prescriptive composition te-
     nets, writers at times must compose vague discourse to render their
     documents most effective.
     • Self-documentation is a writing skill to be developed like oth-
     ers. Integrating it into other writing projects can help writers de-
     velop acuity in this form of self-representation; using self-documen-
     tation enables one to track development and acquisition of new
     skills and knowledge within any given culture.
     • Editing can be construed as cultural renewal and/or reproduc-
     tion, a practice with more far-reaching implications than generally
     acknowledged.
     • Just as the organization employs writers, so may writers employ
     the organizational culture, if they are astute in positioning them-
     selves mentally and psychologically with respect to the culture.

Writers’ Status

Issues of status that arose in some ethnographies had solely to do with
contractual circumstances; for example, a speechwriter working for
the government having civil servant status, or government workers
occupying grade levels concordant with qualifications and reflected in
salaries. Other issues of status had less to do with terms of contract
and more to do with the organization’s mission and raison d’être, re-
flected in structures and chains of command that position writers as
discursive functionaries, as in the case of the association writers dis-
cussed in chapter 3. Yet even though such status is determined prima-
                         ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES    75


rily by the principal function of the organization, it calls attention none-
theless to the conceptualization of writers’ expertise as having to do
solely with form, a trend recurrent across the following observations
on organizational status:

Writers’ Status                                Researcher
apprentice                                     Ann
civil servant                                  Leigh
functionary                                    Diane, Jan, Karla, Mandy
effective status less than official            May
    organization status
employee for management                        Jan, Red
ghost                                          George, Kolar, Leigh
nebulous organization status                   Anita, Heather, Nyck
second-class organization member               Ana, Bernie, Rachel
status shaded by government grade levels       Gwen, Jane, Liz
status time-limited unless move to             Lena
    management
support staff                                  Carolyn, Ella, Ginger, Jeff, Liz
tenuous status, depending upon contracts       Ana, Kali

     This epistemological link becomes more evident when the theme
of status is raised by a writer or editor in an organization other than
a trade association, as in the case of Jeff, a technical editor in an envi-
ronmental engineering firm. This theme of status has clear implications
for reconfiguring writing curricula and making explicit to writers the
theory underpinning reconfigurations, and is developed in chapter 8.
     A third theme of status has implications for writers’ own direct
interventions on behalf of themselves in the workplace: the theme of
official organizational status. May developed this theme by noting her
effective status as inferior to organization chart status; Anita discussed
her civil status as a contractor to a government entity; Heather and
Nyck developed the theme in discussions of various writers’ nebulous
status altogether within the organization. In May’s case, her research
led to a resolve to be more savvy in future job interviews and to attempt
to make her organization purview an explicit part of the contract. In
Nyck’s case it led to his drafting several job descriptions that were
adopted by his organization. In Heather’s case, she found employment
in another organization.
     In recent years researchers have also focused on the increasingly
tenuous status of writers in organizations. Ana noted that her tenu-
ous status hinged on her position as a technical writer (which, she noted
ironically, entailed learning the technologies and needs of clients) while
middle managers (who did not learn technologies and needs) were more
76    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


secure. Kali sketched a Kafkaesque scenario of hirings and firings as a
function of labyrinthine accounting practices in government contracts
(which is developed in chapter 8’s discussion of interventions) and Lena
noted that in the organization she studied, writers could not be promoted
above a certain level unless they moved into management positions.
    A synthesis of the themes of status developed in researchers’ eth-
nographies yields at least the following observations on writers’
subjectivities:

     • The functionary status is clearly unrewarding—writers might
     think of it as temporary, using the job to learn as many skills and
     gain as much knowledge as possible in order to move to a better
     culture. Alternatively, writers might request special training spon-
     sored by the organization to keep publications, processes, and
     products current while enhancing writers’ skills.
     • Discrepancy between official organization status and real pur-
     view, or nebulous organization status altogether, ultimately under-
     cuts organization projects. Writers and their collaborators should
     work to demonstrate this to organizational superiors so as to ne-
     gotiate guarantees of solid authority and attendant remuneration.
     • Writers’ tenuous status within organizations is only becoming
     increasingly tenuous as post-Fordist tenets of “flexibility” take hold
     in organizational management. Writers and their collaborators will
     need clout to counter this trend, as discussed in part three.

Writers’ Roles

Writers’ roles in organizational authorship ranged from the apparently
idiosyncratic to roles that would seem to obtain more systematically
in workplace cultures, as shown in the following list:

Writers’ Roles                                 Researcher
daughter in family                             Nancy and Ellie
talking handbook                               Adria, Joe, Ravi
team members                                   Chet, Ella, Jackie, Jeff, Joanne, Joe,
                                                  Kelly, Kirsten, Leathe, Mary
tutee                                          Ann
idea generator                                 Leigh
information gatherers                          Daisy, Nyck, Red
liaison to exterior                            Starla
roles self-elaborated through                  Brenda
    review process
translator                                     Leathe
                     ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   77


     Ann found herself frequently cast in the role of “tutee” in the four-
person PR firm where she worked. Ellie’s role as “daughter” in her five-
person firm is similarly incidental, though one suspects that in small
businesses a certain family dynamic may subtly shape lived subjec-
tivities. As a counterexample to these two, Brenda observed editors elab-
orating organizational roles for themselves via the review process.
Other roles, as in the case of Adria, Joe, and Ravi, who occasionally
occupied the role of talking handbook to their coworkers, are clearly
linked with limiting conceptions of writing and writers.
     The role of “idea generator,” a theme in Leigh’s ethnography of
speechwriters, identifies a workplace subjectivity that employs certain
writing processes frequently associated with the planning stages and
lodging these processes in explicit and multiple sources determined by
the organization. The role of team member signals subjectivity within
small groups (as in the writing and editing teams of which Chet, Ella,
Jackie, Jeff, Joanne, Joe, Kelly, Kirsten, and Mary were a part) while
alerting us to the ways in which team-member roles are likewise miti-
gated by the team’s life in the larger local culture (as Kelly depicted it
in her study of the shift to team projects in a publications office). Fi-
nally, the roles of “information gatherer” and “liaison to the exterior”
call attention to a subjectivity that is simultaneously inward- and out-
ward-looking with respect to the local culture, positioning the profes-
sional writer and work at a nexus with extracultural values and norms.
(Scholarship on professional writers’ user-advocacy role pertinent to
this role is developed in part three.)
     A synthesis yields the following:

    • Even though certain roles for writers in organizations may
    emerge as incidental (e.g., as tutee, or as daughter), writers might
    be vigilant for the ways in which these roles inflect roles as writ-
    ers: discerning inflections may allow writers to understand those
    parts of learning that are context-dependent and more in the ser-
    vice of the organization than the writer, or to keep incidental roles
    such as family member from overly influencing professional roles
    such as technical writer.
    • Writers might attend to organizational processes (such as docu-
    ment review) that allow them to elaborate certain of their own
    roles.
    • The subjectivity of “talking handbook” is likely to endure as
    long as do archaic conceptualizations of writing as purely formal;
78    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


     collaboration between academics and practicing writers can help
     change these conceptualizations.
     • Roles such as “idea generator” suggest a revisiting of cognitive
     process models to situate activities such as brainstorming and
     nutshelling not only as they spark initial ideas for writing but also
     as they can help locate these ideas within the local culture, as part
     of organizational projects and in the embodiment of the culture
     through written documents.
     • The shapes and roles of teams in organizations are certain to
     diversify in the future, as teams take form temporarily around
     specific projects and as members of teams such as editing teams
     assume the role of envoy to subject-matter teams. Writers and
     curriculum designers should account for these various forms of
     subjectivity in writing research.
     • Writers’ roles as links to the exterior underscore yet again the
     need for writers and for writing curricula to emphasize study of
     larger cultural processes.

Dynamics of Collective Procedures and Writing
In contrast to the themes that focused on an individual writer’s skills,
roles, or status within the organizational culture are those themes that
focused more on collective procedures per se, as these procedures be-
came manifest in document processing, as procedures were inflected
by subcultural dynamics, and as procedures worked to stabilize or in
some cases change local cultural practices. Here again, researchers often
appear in more than one category due to the number of different themes
and topics broached within any given ethnography.

Document Processes

A flowchart of document processes tracing organizational publications
as they move from inception through review and to final publication
might document standard routing, but it could never document the
intricacies of the publication’s interrelationship with organizational
players and policies along the way, as the themes and topics developed
by researchers in this section make clear. Those themes and topics
developing the intricacies of document processes are united in the fol-
lowing list:
                          ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES          79


Document Processing                             Researcher
chain of writing and editing                    Daisy, Red
“chop chain” review                             George
cycles and boilerplating in proposals           Nancy and Ellie
deadlines!                                      Chet, Daisy, Jane, Kelly, Kyle, Leigh,
                                                   Maggie, Mary, Red
decisions and authority in newsletter           Holly
    publication
editorial board intervention in newsletter      Karla
    publication
information flow vs. document process flow      Carolyn, Starla
managing documentation                          Adria, Ella, Joanne
manuscript review entirely on Post-its          Brenda
personal credit for collective production       Ana, Branden
production teams in publications office         Kelly
review and dissemination system                 Jackie, Kirsten, Sue
speech writing as “idea factory”                Leigh
turnaround between editors and authors          Grace, Helen, Jackie, Kyle, Lena,
                                                   Maggie, Sarah
waste in review and publication processes       Mandy

     In small niche organizations, document processes may become
highly repetitive, perhaps inuring writers to wrinkles and possibilities
for innovation or even to the covert roles that they play in authorship—
as Nancy and Ellie concluded when they recognized Ellie’s role in re-
vising boilerplate used in proposals. In larger organizations, the dispar-
ity between real information flow and the information necessary to
assure efficient and effective document flow may at times be enormous
—as Starla discovered when she tracked a press release through its many
revisions and keyed each revision to critical information from specific
organizational players. Document processes are ultimately bound up in
complex collective procedures, which can obscure agency and dampen
individual credit, and which can be used by organizational players for
personal benefit: Ana noted a middle manager’s insistence on being
included in a review process to which he could add nothing yet from
which he could garner budgeting; Branden observed a government
writer co-opting credit for ideas of collective origin; Mandy observed
managers attempting to push through unauthorized publications to
further their careers; Holly observed occasional mayhem in publica-
tion production spawned in part by players’ organizational battles and
in part by high turnover that yielded hazy organizational memory.
     This category underscores the interplay between organizational
knowledge (and memory) and the document publications (and pro-
cesses supporting them) that often represent the organization to the
80   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


exterior or to its culture members. In some cultures document produc-
tion includes strong surveillance of representations, as in the high-se-
curity cultures of the military (part of Sue’s job consisted of combing
each document leaving her division) or high-control cultures such as
associations (class participants with experience in newsletter publica-
tion were amazed to learn from Karla that an editorial board at her
trade association held meetings for each issue). This surveillance may
be teamed with disciplining culture members, as George maintained
upon investigating his cowriters’ attitudes as inflected by the chop-
chain military document review, where superiors up the hierarchy
“chop” material from the original prose. In any case, publication pro-
cesses frequently cut across divisions, implicating at the very least play-
ers within operations divisions and communications divisions, which
might include a subdivision dealing with graphics and publications
platforms. These processes are frequently hierarchical, too, whence
surveillance (and whence, as George’s research demonstrates, ultimate
prose forms at times rife with bureaucratese that no individual writer
would have used).
     These hierarchical and cross-divisional processes that represent the
culture to its members and to outsiders may be repetitive and fairly
standardized in routing across organizational structures, yet as pro-
cesses bound up in organizational dynamics influenced by players in
various positions, they offer occasions for reshaping parts of these
collective procedures. When Brenda tracked editors’ reviews of articles
submitted to the publications division of the association where she
worked, she discovered neither standard forms for evaluation nor
ongoing cataloguing of this work. She also witnessed three editors
subtly crafting their own roles through these document processes (e.g.,
as gatekeeper or content specialist) through their reviews of submis-
sions. Kelly actually encountered a near absence of standardization of
procedures when the publications office she studied shifted to a “team-
approach” to project management that had individual players form-
ing new teams for nearly every new project.
     Finally, document processes may be dependent upon nonorgani-
zational players, as demonstrated by themes of editors’ collaboration
with nonstaff contributors (Grace, Helen, Jackie, Kyle, Lena) and by
themes of reporters’ coverage of events and solicitation of information
from witnesses (Daisy, Red). Observations on writers’ workplace sub-
jectivities drawn across this category yield the following:
                       ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   81


    • Writers are often involved in document routing and publication
    processes that are repetitive, possibly inuring them to new wrinkles
    suggested by a particular project or to new conceptualizations of
    their jobs if the process is viewed macroscopically, as part of the
    organization culture.
    • Perhaps because of their frequent secondary status within or-
    ganizations and certainly because they often are located outside
    inner circles of information and knowledge in organizations, writ-
    ers may encounter disparities between the information they receive
    and the information necessary for efficient and effective document
    processing.
    • Involved in review and publications processes that are often hier-
    archical, writers may be subject to disciplining through these pro-
    cesses. Writing in some cultures is subject to high surveillance and
    writers to a panopticon subjectivity. Within such cultural processes,
    writers may contribute to collective authorship that falls short in
    its prose of their individual standards.
    • As individuals contributing to collective authorship, writers
    mesh individuality with collective representation, yielding a sub-
    jectivity shaped by collaboration yet driven by necessity to docu-
    ment personal input. Under such conditions, they may shape their
    subjectivities through articulating roles in the organization to roles
    in document processes; similarly, writers may shape organizational
    procedures somewhat by bringing skills in organizational analy-
    sis to daily activities such as document processing.
    • As members of teams in the organization’s collective authorship,
    writers may find themselves living subjectivities that frequently shift
    as a function of new team formation and new close collaborators.
    • Writers’ workplace subjectivities are shaped not only by the local
    culture but also by links to outside cultures, through collabora-
    tors or interviewees on writing projects.

Subcultural Dynamics

This category grew from the number of studies that raised themes of
smaller cultures within the larger organizational culture and dynam-
ics among them that at times interconnected with writing processes and
products. In many cases, the theme emerged from a researcher’s tak-
ing stock of how a unit seemed to hold norms and values divergent
82    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


from those encountered in other units, prompting closer inspection of
these norms and values and inviting analysis that interpreted behav-
ior as neither idiosyncratic nor wholly individual. Unlike many themes
that contained occasional glimpses out at the world beyond the cul-
ture of the local organization, these themes produced close inspection
of worlds within the organization, leading class discussions and re-
searchers’ development of themes to harken to theoretical notions such
as the “discourse community.” In several cases, such theoretical fram-
ing enabled researchers to confront stereotypes held within their own
unit about coworkers in other units with different educational and
professional training and values. Though I have used the shorthand
vs. in the list that follows to mark the subcultures that researchers
identified through their topics and themes, the dynamics of these sub-
cultures in these ethnographies were not necessarily oppositional; in-
deed, in a few cases subcultures were perceivable only when framing
analysis in terms of different classes of professionals engaged in the
same project.

Subcultural Dynamics                           Researcher
academic, professional, and government         Grace
     subcultures in a society
administration vs. teachers in schools         Emma, Lara, Marla
agendas of different divisions and             May
     public relations writing
engineers vs. writers and editors              Jeff
communications office’s status in larger       Hart
     university organization
coordination between different divisions       Gloria, Jane
     . . . in correspondence writing
. . . in magazine writing                      Kirsten
flouting nine-to-five conventions              Ravi
MFA writers vs. composition and rhetoric       Kate
     writers in an English department
management of worker affect by director        Cass
     of another division
management vs. writer and editor employees     Diane, Red, Rex
new contracts reshaping teams, work,           Ana, Elaine, Joanne, Kali, Kelly,
     and cycling                                 Leathe, Mary
organization division parallels with gender    Lisa, Rachel
professional staff vs. . . . support staff     Ella, Ginger, Liz
. . . volunteers                               Jackie
top-down and bottom-up cultural dynamics       Lois
veterans vs. novices                           Rex
writers’ culture in an oral organization       Ray, Tess
     culture
                     ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   83


     Jeff was one researcher who was able to reverse commonly held
stereotypes within his unit about engineers’ purported poor writing
abilities as allegedly evidenced by their overnominalization. He inter-
viewed several engineers and discovered that certain phrases perceived
by technical editors as confusing noun strings (he cited in his final eth-
nography the phrase, “the raw influent soluble phosphorous concen-
tration”) were perceived by engineers as common shorthand. When
editors unstrung these nouns, engineers perceived them to be under-
mining their authority, since other engineers reading the text might read
this alternative wording as denoting a lack of familiarity with common
phrasing and hence, perhaps, a lack of experience in the profession.
Other researchers identified similar dynamics between organizational
divisions and sought to account for these dynamics by characterizing
ways of knowing and making sense within a division’s culture: Hart
sketched such characteristics of a communications office in a larger
university culture, as did Tess of the communications division within
the travel agency where she worked. In Tess’s case, she was able to
couple this observation of her communications division as a subcul-
ture with the observation that many of the ways of knowing within it
derived from experience as writers, which at times fell at odds with a
largely “oral” corporate culture. Ray identified a similar opposition,
in his case noting that much of the knowledge in his police department
was communicated orally, at times positioning him as a writer as an
outsider. Rex’s study traced similar outsider/insider dynamics based on
one’s time in the local culture.
     Other researchers addressed dynamics that took form when writ-
ing crossed subcultural divisions (and hence different ways of know-
ing locally) or when the local divisional culture was inflected by issues
such as gender (as in Lisa’s study of writing in a bank cited earlier). In
some cases, subcultural dynamics were observed not along any orga-
nizational divisional lines per se, but as a function of either “top-down”
or “bottom-up” norms and values. As might be expected, the top-down
cultural dynamics often were engendered by management, and the bot-
tom-up dynamics by employees, which included writers in most set-
tings. The most striking example of organizational dynamics that
underscored the ways in which a local culture can upset long-stand-
ing traditions in a profession and remind writers that they ultimately
occupy inferior organizational status came perhaps from Red’s study:
the new owners of the regional newspaper where he worked as reporter
84    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


overturned the age-old subjectivity of journalists as self-managers of
their on-scene time when they installed time clocks and punch cards
to monitor journalists’ time away from their desks.
    A synthesis of subjectivities across these themes of subcultural
dynamics yields the following:

     • Writers are frequently located in writing and editing teams,
     communications divisions, or publications offices within the larger
     organizational culture, producing a subjectivity that will encoun-
     ter other subjectivities shaped by their respective organizational
     positioning. Organizational authorship entails managing these
     diverse subjectivities wrought by subcultural dynamics.
     • As professionals who bring a way of knowing grounded in
     writing practices to a workplace culture, writers will encounter
     ways of knowing grounded in other kinds of discourse communi-
     ties and discursive practices. Organizational authorship takes form
     among these many ways of knowing.
     • Writers new to a culture may encounter subcultures established
     at least in part by length of time in the organization, producing a
     subjectivity not only as novice but also as outsider to traditions
     and practices established over time. Writing to meet one’s goals
     may mean monitoring one’s socialization into such subcultures as
     they shape writing practices.
     • Writers may encounter subcultural dynamics emanating from
     below, beside, or above them in the organizational hierarchy and
     thus be obliged to align themselves explicitly or implicitly, perma-
     nently or momentarily, with these dynamics.
     • Most often writers as a class of professionals figure as employ-
     ees within the organizational hierarchy, located below executive
     management.

Cultural Stabilization and Change

The topics of cultural stabilization and change usually emerged toward
semester’s end, once researchers had developed other themes or ex-
plored other topics and were able to step back and consider implica-
tions for the broader local culture. The list below presents shards on
cultural stabilization and change, in several cases as researchers pin-
pointed specific roles played by writing practices as part of such sta-
bilization and change.
                         ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   85


Stabilization/Change                            Researcher
alienation stemming from organization           Adam, Heather
     restructuring
change in culture membership necessitates       Janice
     change in writing procedures and purview
change in culture through reorganization        Kelly
     into publication teams
change in on-line culture membership            Jillian
     over time
changing school culture through changes         Alice
     in students’ research writing topics
stated change in management theory              Jan
     resulting in no real change in practices
high turnover and therefore no institutional    Adria, Holly
     memory
remodeling culture through formalization        Andrew
     of policy
stabilizing culture through . . . continuous    Challie
     quality improvement and e-mail
. . . socialization                             Kolar
. . . written formalization                     Jackie, Nyck
writers’ knowledge protection during            Ana
     downsizing

     Nyck hypothesized that formal written job descriptions might sta-
bilize job duties in a culture often characterized as disjointed, plagued
by high turnover and vague responsibilities. Similarly, Andrew forecast
a stabilizing of some cultural practices through the writing of formal
procedures at the campus police force he was studying. Challie’s data-
rich study of e-mail messages within the association where she worked
as graphic designer prompted her to classify these messages by type
and then use these types to gauge the organization’s “continuous qual-
ity improvement,” reasoning that the frequency of clearly misaddressed
messages and misunderstood uses for e-mail indicated a failure in train-
ing to maintain this quality improvement. Her study concluded with
suggestions that would bolster this training and, presumably, stabilize
some cultural practices.
     Kolar’s study of socialization into the practice of fabricating let-
ters in a senator’s press office reminds us of the strength of socializa-
tion into locally stabilized writing practices when a culture is under-
girded by powerful discourses, a topic rejoined in chapter 5. Jan studied
a similarly top-down culture, an industry association, as it attempted
a cultural shift to “issues management.” When Jan traced writing prac-
tices and decision making as a function of this purported shift, how-
ever, she found no change.
86    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


    Other researchers touched upon themes of stabilization and change
by observing the changes in cultural membership over time as it influ-
enced writing practices (as in Jillian’s study of on-line discussions at
Megabyte University), of high turnover yielding no institutional mem-
ory (as in Adria’s study of high-tech contracting), of changes in local
cultural organization as it affected writing practices (as in Kelly’s study
of a publications office’s shift to project teams), and changes in writ-
ing practices consciously enacted in the hopes of changing organiza-
tional culture (as in Alice’s study of her own fourth grade classroom,
in which she substituted for the conventional lessons in research writ-
ing her own project locating research topics in students’ home and
ethnic cultures).
    A synthesis yields the following:

     • Writers’ work within larger organizational structures and dy-
     namics may make them agents of stabilization of the culture, in-
     cluding many of the culture’s norms and values; alternatively, writ-
     ers’ work within these structures and dynamics may make them
     agents of change. In the latter case, the scope of agency probably
     will depend upon the coincidence between the proposed changes
     and the organization’s goals and underlying discourses.
     • Writers in organizations driven by powerful discourses and aims
     will most likely be subjected to strong (even if subtle) socializa-
     tion into the culture’s norms and values.
     • Many cultures change over time with changes in membership
     and with perceptions of organizational mission; writers’ subjectiv-
     ities will shift with these changes, at times dramatically through
     organizational restructuring.

Organizational Goals
Of all the researchers represented in this book, Lee alone developed
organizational goals as her central theme. She did so because she was
intent upon using this research to garner funding and institutional sup-
port for her writing center, which she had until then run on a shoestring
budget with an all-volunteer staff. Ultimately she was forced to con-
front the disheartening realization that norms and values in the broader
community college culture were such that support probably would not
come. Though disheartening, this realization granted her enhanced per-
spective on the culture’s valuing of her own writing as a teaching pro-
                            ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   87


fessional, later prompting her to resign. Other researchers investigated
organizational goals in varying degrees as their explorations of other
topics and themes implicated the goals of the organization.

Organizational Goals                              Researcher
assuring reelection                               Kolar
assuring that the Web site is visited             Gary
gaining and fulfilling contracts                  Ana, Janice, Kali, Ravi
garnering and disbursing funds                    Megan
lobbying                                          Bernie, Jan
maintaining membership                            Nidean
perpetuating image                                Corinne
preparing boys for college entrance               Anne
procuring and maintaining clients                 Ella, Ginger
site for writing instruction vs. . . .            Lee
     computer lab
. . . graduate student support                    Kate

     Megan’s study of the vague discourse necessary to memoranda of
understanding between donors and a university foundation enabled her
to link this discursive phenomenon explicitly with organizational goals,
since without such discourse the organization would be dramatically
hampered in meeting its goals. Similarly, Gary’s simple observation that
the organization he studied could not exist if its Web site were not
frequented enabled him to analyze stylistic changes to Web copy ac-
cordingly, as a function at least in part of number of hits. Studies in
recent years by Ana, Janice, Kali, and Ravi have likewise placed orga-
nizational goals squarely among those themes and topics developed
in analysis.
     Other researchers touched upon organizational goals more tangen-
tially: Nidean in her observation of the goal of maintaining member-
ship as shaping local language practices; Anne in her realization that
the strong organizational goal of preparing boys for college through
conventional argumentative writing sabotaged her own efforts to in-
struct the boys in expressive journal writing; Jan, Bernie, Ella, Ginger,
and Kolar in their acknowledgment of intractable organizational goals
shaping cultural practice; and Kate in her implicit challenge to the local
organizational goal of providing support for MFA graduate students
by trading stipends for work in the writing center, while graduate stu-
dents concentrating in the teaching of writing and literature were rarely
offered such positions.
     Important aspects of writers’ organizational subjectivities are high-
lighted by the theme of organizational goals:
88    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


     • Individual writers in organizations most likely stand very little
     chance of realizing personal goals in or through their writing if these
     goals stand at loggerheads with larger organizational goals. Though
     this observation may seem a truism, in this context it calls atten-
     tion to a subjectivity with little clout if not acting in chorus with a
     professional class or classes (including, perhaps, allied scholars).
     • In some organizational contexts, organizational goals and or-
     ganizational authorship are nearly synonymous, so much does the
     organization exist through and by virtue of its representation to a
     specific clientele through specific documents. In the case of World
     Wide Web representations, author-audience dynamics are already
     shifting out of the slow feedback loops of the past.

From Organization Charts to Discursive Digs: Imagining New Unities
in Subjective Work Lives
A review of organizational features developed as topics and themes in
researchers’ ethnographic analyses underscores the degree to which
professional writers find themselves in the paradoxical position of being
charged with producing discursive representations while excluded from
inner circles of information and knowledge that could inform those
representations. In the dynamics that often obtain between individu-
als and local organizations, writers’ second-class, support-staff, func-
tionary status inevitably undercuts their effectiveness as well as the or-
ganization’s potential. Starla’s comment in the chapter epigraph came
in the midst of a fifty-page ethnography documenting a local culture
in which players at upper echelons hoarded information to leverage
on their own behalf, a workplace dynamic noted in other forms by
several other researchers in this chapter. Clearly, such a zero-sum ide-
ology works against writers and the organizations that employ them,
yet this ideology endures, subtly interlocked with composition episte-
mologies positing form as separate from content and writing as a mode
for communicating predetermined thoughts rather than for exploring
and instantiating reality.
     To imagine new unities, writers and writing scholars will need to
devise inquiries in classrooms and in workplaces that take phenom-
ena such as “role” and resituate them with respect to ongoing social
constructions of realities via discursive acts and events. To do so, writers
will need to elaborate new approaches and skills in monitoring their
                     ORGANIZATIONAL FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   89


writing practices and the interplay between these practices and local
cultures’ norms and values. Writers’ “skills,” configured through popu-
lar understandings of composition grounded in current-traditional epis-
temology, will require renovation in the light of social constructionist
theory and postmodern understandings of the ways in which discourses
shape subjective work lives.
     Equipped with such understandings of writing in organizational
settings, writers may be able to mine document processes for their full
potential, gleaning value where before no unities beyond mundane pro-
duction appeared. Writers may be able to perceive subcultural dynam-
ics in great complexity and to embrace these dynamics for their full
potential, too, bringing their knowledge of discursive processes to bear
on organizational processes in which such dynamics can offer spring-
boards for enhanced understandings of knowledge emanating from
various discourse communities. Writers may be able to identify and prob-
lematize their roles as agents of organizational stabilization and change,
along with the norms and values therein reified through discursive
practices. (Susan Katz’s exploration of document review develops this
potential.) Ultimately, writers may be able to assume greater say in or-
ganizational goals by virtue of their power to realize through their
discursive work some unities of value that lie beyond the grasp of other
professional classes. In Information Ecology, Thomas Davenport, who
specializes in “re-engineering” organizations, claims that information
technology is relatively unimportant in harnessing the value inherent
in information; writers, through their knowledge of information pro-
cesses as imbricated with organizational processes, can harness value
in ways that information technology only makes possible.
     As organizations increasingly become the major arenas for indi-
viduals’ public lives, writers, through their skills and knowledge of lan-
guage theories and practices, can become vital agents in assuring that
these arenas assure viable lives, public and private, for all who live the
effects of organizational authorship. The reflexive practices suggested
in chapter 3 can aid them in achieving this goal, as can their “voices
from within” various organizations, to invoke once again the poten-
tial of autoethnography as seen by David Hayano. Speaking from
within organizations, equipped with knowledge and theories developed
in tandem with collaborators from the academy, writers as discourse
specialists engaged in new modes of composing can sketch new unities
for themselves and for us all via organizational authorship. Research-
90   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


ers in this volume have already tread upon this ground, uncovering
shards that match organizational structures and practices with discur-
sive features in local cultures, in the process identifying phenomena that
can enable us all to engage in some cognitive mapping to the end of
new unities. The next chapter presents their foray into this territory.
5   DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE
    WRITING CULTURES

    Postmodern rhetoric would begin by assuming that all discourses
    warrant variable subject positions ranging from mostly satisfying
    to mostly unsatisfying for those individuals named by them. Each
    institutionalized discourse privileges some people and not others
    by generating uneven and unequal subject positions as various as
    stereotypes and agents.
                           —Linda Brodkey, “On the Subjects of Class
                                 and Gender in ‘The Literacy Letters’”

    Mandy: I wanted to know how much of your stuff—how much
       needs to be revealed in our ethnography—I’m doing my
       ethnography in my work setting, which is a[n] association
       with no blacks in upper management. Blacks are only in
       lower positions, as a secretary, or they work in the mail room.
       That’s across the gamut. And I want to know how important
       that is in my ethnography. Do I need to reveal that? Because
       in my mind I’m always conscious of that, especially in my
       interactions with my bosses, who are all, except for one—
       one’s a white female, the rest are all white males—I’m
       conscious of their interpretation of me as a black female.
       Does that need to come across in my ethnography? . . . I
       mean, it’s part of me, and I think it’s important. But I’m
       afraid if I put that in my ethnography, it might go off on a
       different tangent and that might not be what the ethnography
       is supposed to be about.
    JH: A different tangent from what?
    Mandy: From—Because we’re doing an ethnography of writing.
       It might go off into a different um—
    JH: But wasn’t Peggy Yocom’s ethnography about herself some?
                                           —discussion in class, 3/9/93




                                                                          91
92   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS




To speak of the discursive features of workplace cultures is to embrace
an array of understandings of the term “discourse.” One use of the term
refers to any linguistic unit beyond the sentence; that is, a paragraph or
series of paragraphs forming a unit, or “full text” (Kinneavy 4). An-
other usage refers to language use as determined by the conventions of
a particular community or socialized group, often referred to as a “dis-
course community” in composition literature. Finally, poststructural
and postmodern theories of discourse would define it as a way of think-
ing (and knowing and talking) about the world, inherently ideological
and positing language not as a vehicle to describe a preexisting reality
but as the material out of which thought and reality are constructed.
     With postmodern theories of discourse come postmodern rheto-
rics that assume that all discourses warrant variable subject positions
and that these subject positions vary dramatically, at times, in terms
of the purview and agency they grant their occupants (Brodkey, “On
the Subjects”). Of course, subjectivities become “articulated” (see Hall)
to various ideologies and to authority differently in different local cir-
cumstances. Hence the value in the petits recits coming from profes-
sional writers’ autoethnographic analyses, since these stories enable us
to see the actual assignment of subject positions through discourses at
work in local cultures, to witness the imbrication of discourses and sub-
jective work lives, and in some cases to imagine alternative unities made
possible by changing the configurations of discursive environments.
     Such was the case with Mandy as she struggled with her autoeth-
nographic authorship, evidenced in the excerpt from class discussion
used as chapter epigraph. We had been reading many of the “first-
generation” workplace ethnographies conducted by academic research-
ers who did not belong to the workplace cultures under study and who
focused on such discursive issues as overnominalization or inappro-
priate narration (see, for example, Brown and Herndl) in “nonaca-
demic” writing. In part because these researchers were nonmembers
of the culture under study and in part because they were proceeding
under research paradigms that minimalized the researcher’s presence
                          DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   93


in accounts, issues such as the kind raised by Mandy rarely emerged,
and when they did, the treatment of them could be no more than cur-
sory. Mandy sought on the one hand to emulate these earlier ethnog-
raphies in their fieldwork rigor and theoretical sophistication, yet at
the same time she wanted to analyze issues ever present in her subjec-
tive work life as a writer. Bolstered by our classroom discussions of cur-
rent social science tenets of positioned subjectivity and of recent meth-
odologies from ethnography and folklore, autoethnography among
them, Mandy was able to limn some of the institutionalized discourses
and the privileges they bestowed and withheld at her organization.
     In her ethnography, we see a culture highly inflected by racism and
sexism in its staffing policy, as indicated in Mandy’s above comment.
White executives in this association occupy powerful subject positions
that enable acts as repugnant as a public upbraiding of the all-black
staff in the mail room. As Mandy collected other data for her autoeth-
nography, she saw the discourses of sexism and racism working in other
ways: along with the range of subject positions made possible by these
discourses came a range of informational subterfuges. Middle manag-
ers, who knew that the flow of information between document pro-
duction teams and the executives above them was less than salubrious,
attempted to exploit this cultural feature to their own ends, in one case
ending in a mass publication halted in midproduction when the subter-
fuge was discovered. Otherwise stated, “discourse” as understood in
the postmodern sense had fractured the unities of discourse most val-
ued by workplace management: brochures and proposals that usually
serve strong instrumental ends, or discourses in the modernist sense.
     Mandy’s research thus demonstrates the power both of the genre
of autoethnography and of understanding discourse simultaneously in
modern and postmodern terms as we attempt to map discursive fea-
tures of workplace cultures. This genre enables inspecting writers’ sub-
jective work lives for their quality, and readers will note that Mandy
also appears as a shard in the section on discourse effects, document-
ing the frustration that can infiltrate writer psychology under such cir-
cumstances. And a simultaneous focus on kinds of writing, underly-
ing discourses, and effects of discourse enables an analysis of the ways
in which the capacity of the organization is hampered by counterpro-
ductive underlying discourses (as documented under “knowledge and
behavior” as “producing waste”).
     The eighty-four researchers represented in this volume harkened
to all three understandings of discourse listed above, to judge by class
94   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


discussions and ethnographies in draft and final forms. To classify the
shards turned up by such work, I have chosen the umbrella categories
of discourse forms and discourse effects. The broad category of dis-
course forms includes shards that derive from each of the three defini-
tions of discourse outlined above. For example, kinds of writing and
organizational products include shards suggesting the modernist defi-
nition of “full text,” for the most part. The category of multiple dis-
courses hinges strongly on the second definition that invokes notions
of “discourse community.” The category of underlying discourses is
strongly bound to postmodern definitions of discourse, as are the cat-
egories of knowledge and behavior and writer psychology listed un-
der discourse effects. As Mandy’s appearance in three different sections
of this chapter demonstrates, researchers often fall into several catego-
ries simultaneously, enabling us to glean cultural complexities in dis-
cursive forms previously viewed as flat and mundane under compo-
sition’s formalist epistemologies or the liberal humanist epistemologies
with which they have so often been allied.
     As in the previous chapter, I have commented on selected shards
within each table to hint at complexities beyond these telegraphic rep-
resentations, based on researchers’ full ethnographies and class discus-
sions. I have also drawn syntheses across each table, to support dis-
cussions in the conclusion and in part three, and to aid readings across
each table that connect with other locales, other small stories, and with
other mappings-in-process that can render small stories big.

Discourse Forms
Though as noted above the “forms” represented in the first four sec-
tions below vary dramatically in nature—from mundane, tangible
artifacts to the more intangible ways of knowing and thinking—this
umbrella category serves to partition these discursive features as pro-
duced (or reproduced) by a culture from the repercussions of produc-
tion (and reproduction), which are presented in the two concluding
sections. The discussions of selected shards and syntheses across
subtables aim in part at broadening composition theory’s repertoires
and understandings of “form.”

Kinds of Writing

Like Mandy, researchers each year found themselves accumulating a
                                 DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES     95


mass of data with many intriguing insights on local cultural practices,
yet they were often unsure about the ways to link these insights to dis-
cursive practices. Many researchers resolved this issue by selecting a
specific kind of writing that touched various organizational players or
that stood as a significant organizational publication and then system-
atically studying its links to other cultural practices and ways of know-
ing. These kinds of writing, listed below, do not include the many other
kinds of writing that were mentioned incidentally as researchers ex-
plored other topics and themes.

Kinds of Writing                                  Researcher
academic                                          Alice, Anne, Kate, Lee
books                                             Diane, Maggie
brochures                                         Nidean
captions                                          Rex
correspondence                                    Ella, Emma, Gloria, Jane, Janice, Lisa,
                                                      Megan, Phoebe, Rachel
editorial review                                  Brenda
editorials                                        Jen
e-mail                                            Amy, Challie, Ella, Jillian
job descriptions                                  Nyck
magazines                                         Helen, Jackie, Kirsten, Kyle, Lena
memos                                             Jan, Jihad, Lois, Megan, Tom
mission statements                                Lara, Megan
news                                              Daisy, Red
newsletters                                       Holly, Itsy, Jane, Karla, Leathe, Meg
organizational analyses                           Mary
organizational histories                          Elaine
patient logs                                      Norma
personal ’zines                                   Mack
policy                                            Branden, Ray
press releases                                    Ann, Corinne, Kolar, Starla
proposals                                         Jeff, Leathe, Nancy and Ellie, Ravi
public relations                                  Hart, May
reports                                           Anita, Jane, Julie, Leathe, Meg, Rachel
self-documentation                                Gwen, Meg
society journal articles                          Grace
solicitations, acknowledgments                    Megan
speeches                                          Leigh
technical documentation                           Adria, Ana, Carolyn, Jeff, Joanne,
                                                      Joe, Kali
World Wide Web pages                              Adria, Albert, Gary, Jackie, Leathe, Meg

    So it was that Nidean’s research on a fitness consultancy’s language
practices aimed at developing and sustaining membership included a
discussion grounded in the graphics and editing principles of the
company’s sales brochure which identified this brochure as one cul-
tural artifact among others contributing to a serious, “no-frills” de-
96    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


piction of body sculpting. Inspections of mundane writing such as
correspondence led researchers to perceive among standard formats
some extensions of the local culture’s values, as in Lisa’s analysis of
writing styles across divisions that reflected not only traditional val-
ues upheld by these divisions within the banking industry but also local
values that had taken form along gender lines. In Gloria’s case, she
traced the emergence of an implied author in letters sent out by the
Library of Congress to a citizen, this author embodying conflicting mes-
sages owing not so much to divisional values as to the dynamics of com-
position across divisions. Other researchers were able to see quotid-
ian writing through new eyes: the style of illustration captions as subtly
shaped not by knowledge of reading practices but by socialization into
conventions among veteran writers (Rex); the writing of policy as a
redefinition of cultural practice, overturning values clung to by some
members with romantic fervor and hence positioning the policy writer
(Ray) as countercultural; composing World Wide Web pages as a com-
plex management of representations of team members based on their
own on-line representations to the technical writer (Albert), reflecting
a local culture often grounded more in virtual interactions than in face-
to-face ones.
    In even the most purportedly banal kind of writing in organiza-
tional settings—the memo—we see a complex interweaving of discur-
sive forms and cultural practices. Jan noted the use of memos as orga-
nizational smokescreens enabling business as usual while ostensibly
changing; Jihad, the inept use of memos by lower-rung employees; Lois,
the attempt by top management to shape virtual cultures through blan-
ket claims that employees at lower echelons interpreted skeptically;
Megan, the complex understandings that underpin vague discourse in
memos of understanding; and Tom, the institutional leverage attempted
through subtle changes in tone when memos went up the hierarchy.
    These kinds of writing encountered in the workplace suggest the
following observations on writers’ subjectivities as related to them:

     • The multiple subject positions implicated in many kinds of
     writing in the workplace may include any of the following (and
     more): organization members who contribute directly or indirectly
     to documents, funding organizations or clients that may have com-
     missioned the organization, other members of the organization
     who may be affected by the document (including prospective mem-
     bers, too), addressees of documents leaving the organization, the
                                DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   97


     constituents, extraorganizational writers, end-users of a document,
     people who are the topic of writing, and in many cases the gen-
     eral public. Because agency takes form among these many subject
     positions, professional writers require structures and practices to
     monitor and assess this agency.
     • Because discourses such as instrumental discourse govern much
     workplace writing, this form of writing requires reflexive analy-
     sis, to determine not only forms of agency but also eventual acts
     to which compositions may be linked.

Organizational Products

This category took form because a few researchers focused on specific
documents that were quite literally part of the organization’s end prod-
uct, as in Jen’s study of the editorials in the job announcement news-
letter produced at the small private organization where she worked as
editorial assistant. Kinds of writing in this category are quite similar
to those in the previous category, with the exception that they target
end readers more immediately in many cases. (Including Joe in this
category is a bit of a stretch, in that he studied the style manual pro-
duced for internal consumption; all the same, the manual did repre-
sent an end product discrete from organizational writing supporting
other end products.)

Organizational Products                          Researcher
association newsletter                           Jackie, Karla
corporate histories                              Elaine
correspondence about research                    Gloria
editorial pages of job announcement              Jen
    newsletter
letters soliciting funds for educational         Megan
    development
magazine                                         Helen, Kyle, Lena
press releases                                   Ann
publicity brochures                              Corinne
reference books and brochures                    Adam, Chet, Maggie
software                                         Gary
software documentation                           Carolyn
style manual                                     Joe
recruitment brochure/alumni magazine             Hart
World Wide Web page                              Gary, Leathe

    Because these discursive products often play vital roles in an
organization’s solvency, which often depends upon consumer satisfac-
98    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


tion with the product, these artifacts can perhaps indicate new direc-
tions to be taken in conceptualizing end-user roles in organizational
authorship. Gary’s research on Web page revisions undertaken as a re-
sult of user feedback and number of hits, mentioned earlier, augurs such
reconceptualization. Those publications circulating in relatively closed
circuits, such as association newsletters, augur similar reconceptual-
izations, as Jackie’s tracing of input from member-contributors via e-
mail attests.
     In another vein, Joe’s research raised issues of misrepresentation
of a class of workers through an official organization publication, and
Helen’s research on an organization’s editing processes raised issues
of reproduction of local cultural values through the discursive work
of the organization’s magazine. Such issues suggest two more obser-
vations on writers’ workplace subjectivities:

     • Writers often have little say in an organization’s end products,
     yet studying these products in concert with local and larger cul-
     tural processes may hold potential for exploring new author-reader
     dynamics in composition.
     • Organizational products at times misrepresent writers as a class
     of professionals, particularly when those products are generated
     without due input from writers.

Multiple Discourses

This category parallels that of subcultural dynamics discussed in the
previous chapter as part of the organizational features explored by
researchers. But whereas explorations of subcultural dynamics tended
to identify subgroups prior to (and in many cases independently of)
identification of specific discourses that shaped their ways of know-
ing, explorations of multiple discourses usually began with the identi-
fication of a kind of discourse in texts or utterances, then the charac-
terization of this discourse and its operations within the local culture.
These multiple discourses are represented in the following list.
Multiple Discourses                            Researcher
“artistic” discourse/business discourse        Phoebe
engineers’ discourse/editors’ discourse        Jackie, Jeff
“feminine” discourse/business discourse        Jen
legal discourse/plain English                  Ginger
medical discourse/lay discourse                Norma
official organizational discourse/             Diane, Lois
    workers’ discourse
                                DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   99

oral discourse/written discourse                 Ray, Tess
promotional discourse/news discourse             Jackie
scholarly discourse/business discourse           Elaine
school discourse/home discourse                  Alice
school discourse/work discourse                  Julie
writers’ discourse/writing teachers’ discourse   Kate

     As illustration, Jen identified in the editorial pages of a job an-
nouncements newsletter what she characterized as a “feminine” dis-
course in its nurturing and supportive qualities, balancing, in her view,
the cut-and-dried quality of the announcements, which she referred to
as a “business discourse.” Phoebe similarly identified a discourse of
artists that imbued the business writing at the nonprofit organization
where she worked, marked by excess verbiage and embellished (and
inexact) prose accounts of organization events in official memos to file
and sent up the hierarchy. Taking stock of such discourses and the ways
they interrelate with local cultural practices, even if the terms of analysis
remain inchoate, can enable writers to reexamine their own terms of
membership and positions with respect to an organization’s undertak-
ings, as it did in the cases of both Jen and Phoebe.
     Exploring multiple discourses can also enable writers to revise their
understandings of their jobs and to perform them with greater satis-
faction and insight, as in the case of Jeff’s explorations of engineers’
discourse as edited by technical writers discussed above. Jackie simi-
larly found herself assessing her newsletter’s content as driven by both
a “news” discourse (drawing on her background as a journalist) and
by a “promotional” discourse, which she perceived as less substantive.
These explorations can provide writers with another means of inter-
preting official organizational discourse and spontaneous reactions to
it from the ranks as it has implications for their own work and as it
sketches contours of a workplace culture. Such was the case for both
Lois and Diane. Lois solicited her colleagues’ responses to a memo from
the CEO and interpreted these responses as a measure of how work-
ers positioned themselves vis-à-vis the positioning of readers implied
by the memo. Against daily displays of inattention by management to
work in the publications division, Diane interpreted the various semi-
nars and workshops conducted by outside animators to the goal of
quality improvement as a subterfuge intended to placate workers. The
ways in which multiple discourses work to position culture members
will be rejoined in the next section on underlying discourses. Insights
on writers’ workplace subjectivities afforded by these and the previ-
ous observations are the following:
100    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


      • Writers are likely to encounter multiple discourses as they me-
      diate organizational authorship. These discourses may emanate
      from specific discourse communities (such as engineers) and even
      subcommunities (such as hydraulic engineers) or they may take
      form through local practice. As subjects among these discourses,
      writers require tools for interpreting them and crafting their con-
      sequent professional practice.
      • Among the multiple discourses that professional writers will
      encounter in organizations most certainly will figure an official
      organizational discourse emanating from the upper hierarchy and
      various spontaneous discourses containing counterpositions; as
      subjects among these discourses, writers require tools for interpret-
      ing them and crafting their consequent professional practice.

Underlying Discourses

The official organizational discourses noted by Lois and Diane were
in their turn inflected by management discourse more generally, as ar-
ticulated by organizational players whose job it was to manage other
workers. Constantly under elaboration through the many institutions
that are devoted to research and training in management (whether part
of graduate study preparing workers for management positions or part
of in-house training), with firm ties to other powerful discourses such
as market discourse, management discourse will undoubtedly continue
to position professional writers as discourse workers in the foresee-
able future. Writers’ subjectivities will be shaped by the forms this dis-
course takes within local structures and dynamics, suggesting impli-
cations both for writers as they individually plot their career courses
and for writing scholars and researchers in the fields of professional
writing and composition. Through similar alliances, other discourses
shape workplace cultures and hence the subjectivities of culture mem-
bers. Some such discourses, turned up by researchers in the Cultures
of Professional Writing course, appear below.

Underlying Discourses                           Researcher
anti-school                                     Mack
education                                       Ann
egalitarian discourse                           Amy
elitism                                         Branden, Mary
fund-raising                                    Megan
“ghosting” discourse                            George, Leigh
                                 DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   101

lobbying and execution                            Bernie, Jan, Karla, Kirsten,
                                                     Mandy, Meg
history and tradition                             Bernie
management                                        Cass, Diane, Lois
market discourse                                  Ana, Gary, Nidean, Ravi
military contracting discourse                    Adria, Kali
military discourse                                Anita, George, Sue
political discourse                               Kolar
safety                                            Lena
sexism                                            Lisa, Rachel
sexism and racism                                 Ana, Mandy

     Bernie noted discourses of history and tradition in the law profes-
sion association where he worked as an editor, permitting him en-
hanced understanding of his second-class organizational status, since
the histories and traditions deemed prestigious in the field of writing
are classically attached only to literature and poetry. Researchers Lisa,
Rachel, and Ana each like Mandy identified ways in which a discourse
of sexism curtailed the prowess of professional writers and hence the
productivity of the organization. Amy noted an expressed discourse of
egalitarianism at odds with enactments of decision making.
     As we investigate the composition of subjectivities through discur-
sive practices, we might also analyze the workings of discourses in or-
ganizational settings as they articulate with other discourses to pro-
duce specific subject positions, as in the alliances between management
discourse and market discourse mentioned above. Ann’s occasional
subject position of “tutee” in the small public relations firm where she
worked signals the presence of a specific kind of discourse of educa-
tion in arms with market discourse and others. As writers and schol-
ars of writing we might ask ourselves what other subject positions are
likely to take form through these articulations, how we might inter-
pret such positions, and what the implications are for writers, their
organizational cultures, and subjects beyond these cultures.
     Both George and Sue, as employees of the military, were ever aware
of military discourse and the way it positions its subjects; in the case
of this discourse in particular, its strong alliance with political discourse
and its track record of supporting discourses such as sexism and hete-
rosexism suggest workplace cultures in which writing takes place in
less than salubrious conditions. Insights on such conditions as they af-
fect writer psychology and culture members’ knowledge and behav-
ior will be treated below, in the discussion of discourse effects. For the
present, implications across the category of underlying discourses for
writers’ subjectivities are the following:
102    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


      • As discourse workers in organizations, writers are sure to en-
      counter a discourse of management allied with other discourses and
      enacted in particular forms locally, along with the counterdis-
      courses these discourses will engender; writers will need analyti-
      cal tools and training to apprehend the workings of these discourses
      so as to interpret their implications for themselves as culture mem-
      bers and for organizational authorship.
      • In workplace cultures writers will find themselves subject to
      varieties of discourses that vary from locale to locale. They will
      need tools and training to discern these discourses, to know their
      histories in other environments, to understand how they articu-
      late to other discourses locally, and to plan careers and to inter-
      pret these cultural phenomena in their implications for organiza-
      tional authorship.

Discourse Effects
Just as the above discussion of discourse forms seeks to enhance un-
derstandings of these (seemingly neutral) forms as imbued with local
cultural norms and values and contributing to a culture promoting
specific kinds of subjectivities for its members, so does the discussion
of discourse effects which follows attempt to enhance our understand-
ings of the ways in which specific cultural configurations produce real
effects that members experience. Early postmodern and poststructural
theory construed the (textualized) subject as an effect of discourse. In
the light of recent theoretical developments that admit individual
agency through specific articulations among discourses effected in given
cultural moments and scenes (see Stuart Hall’s work, noted earlier),
this section attempts to sketch effects of discourse upon subjects in
workplace cultures under empirical study. First comes a summary of
effects on a specific class of culture members: professional writers as
they exercise their craft. Then come observations on the effects of dis-
course on the workplace culture as a whole, through a focus on be-
havior and ways of knowing.

Writer Psychology

When researchers focused on the effects of discourses in the local cul-
tures they studied, they raised several themes having to do with per-
                                DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES       103


ceived effects on the mind-sets that writers brought to their writing,
as summarized in the following list.

Writer Psychology                                Researcher
activity report ratcheting up expectations       Meg
attention to self-documentation . . .            Ray
     as protection
. . . for recompense                             Meg
deadlines as prompt                              Chet, Daisy, Jane, Kelly, Kirsten, Kyle,
                                                   Leigh, Maggie, Mary, Red
engagement based on whether writing is           Anne
    perceived as academic or nonacademic
freelancer autonomy/insecurity                   Mack, Sarah
frustration                                      Carolyn, Diane, Elaine, Ella, Holly,
                                                    Mandy, Rachel
low morale                                       Adam, Lisa, Sue
psychology tied to credentials                   Nyck
resignation                                      Bernie
self-motivated standards                         Kali
shift in psychology as a function of             Gwen
    self-documentation
split-subjectivity via virtuality                Adria, Albert
withdrawal of engagement                         Ana, George, Heather, Jane

Through interviews with writers in the military chop chain, for ex-
ample, George found that in some cases writers did not even attempt
to visualize their ultimate audiences. When I asked him in conference
why he thought that “Tom,” one of his interviewees, adopted such an
approach, he said:

     I think he’s just been beaten to a pulp, and it doesn’t do any good, so he’s
     not going to do it anymore. He’s gonna write it like he would write it if
     he were the boss, and if they want to change it—he knows they’re going
     to change it—let ’em change it. (individual conference, 9/4/94)

Otherwise stated, a disciplining discourse that often dominated docu-
ment review processes in this local culture had resulted in a withdrawal
of full engagement by a writer in the writing project. Other research-
ers identified “low morale” among writers—as related to cultural pro-
cesses that had writers believing that they were judged on factors other
than their writing performance (Adam, Lisa) or that kept writers in
the dark about decisions above them that would ultimately affect their
working conditions (Sue). It would be difficult to isolate any one dis-
course producing such results, but in Lisa’s case discourses of sexism
and management discourse (at the very least) produced this effect, and
104    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


in Sue’s (who worked in a military office), discourses of sexism and
authoritarianism. Undoubtedly, many other discourses were at work
in these settings, some drawn from fairly generalized discourses and
others unique to local settings; provocative for professional writers re-
searching such cultures and for scholars collaborating with them is not
only identifying these discourses but pondering the way they interact
with one another to produce different ranges of possible subject posi-
tions for different culture members.
     Taking stock of the ways that various discourses articulate can in
some cases enable individual writers to effect shifts in their own writ-
ing psychology: when Gwen realized the degree to which a discourse
of surveillance imbued even her casual and incidental discussions with
her supervisor, she shifted her mental approach to logging her activi-
ties, reconceptualizing such record keeping as a kind of self-documen-
tation that could one day serve to justify writing decisions. Ray simi-
larly increased his memos to file once he realized that the discourse of
orality underpinning his local culture had teamed with others to frame
his policy writing as deriving from his own impetus rather than from
institutional mandate.
     One might dismiss elements of writer psychology as idiosyncratic
and writers’ objections to particular subjectivities as beyond their rights.
But against these demonstrations of the interleaving of writer psychol-
ogy and organizational structures and processes, it would seem more
expedient for writers, scholars of professional writing, and workplace
managers—if only in the name of organizational productivity during
the national shift to a high-value economy—to seize upon such indi-
ces of a counterproductive culture and effect changes in local cultures
that would prompt changes in such subjectivities. Ideas for such a pro-
ject will be explored in part three, linking observations elsewhere on
professional writers’ subjectivities with the implications drawn here
on the topic of writer psychology. Two key observations on the links
between writer psychology and subjectivity as shaped by a workplace
culture’s discursive features are the following:

      • By its nature, writing engages writers’ affect; writer psychology
      is not merely individual but bound up in the various subject posi-
      tions supported by the structures and dynamics of an organization.
      Writers can benefit from developing acuity in discerning the ways
      that individual psychology is shaped by psychologies engendered
      by the specifics of a local culture.
                               DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES    105


     • Organizations can benefit by making positive and imaginative
     writer psychology a priority, producing cultural dynamics that
     support writers as they manage organizational authorship.

Cultural Knowledge and Behavior

In addition to exploring the effects of various discourses on writers as
they performed their work, certain researchers observed more general
effects of discourse on culture members’ behavior and the knowledge
that informed it. From socializing culture members to adopt local
norms to disciplining long-standing culture members, different dis-
courses positioned culture members in ways that prompted certain
kinds of behavior. Similarly, the ready-made frames for interpreting
reality provided by some discourses at times prompted misinterpreta-
tions and hence erroneous knowledge. Some of these effects are pre-
sented below.

Knowledge and Behavior                          Researcher
adopting local norms                            Kolar, Nidean
coping with stress                              Ginger, Mary
demanding patience                              Anita, Chet, Jane, Kyle, Lena, Maggie
disciplining                                    Ann, George
managing affect along with effect               Cass
mismanaging                                     Heather, Phoebe
positioning with respect to discourse           Jihad, Marla
    of administration by culture members
positioning writer as “shield” for higher-ups   Ray
producing alienation                            Adam, Heather, Holly, Karla, Tess
producing waste                                 Mandy
prompting counterculture                        Diane, Lois
prompting misinterpretations                    Grace, Jeff
requiring diplomacy                             Ella, Jackie, Jeff
undermining morale                              Nyck, Sue
working the bureaucracy                         Ana, Branden, Mandy, Meg

    Researchers’ themes tended to inspect some of the results of cul-
tural knowledge and behavior wrought by specific discourses: the ways
that various culture members might subtly position themselves with
respect to administrative discourse (Marla, Jihad), for example, or the
way in which a particular cultural member, in this case a writer, be-
came positioned as a “shield” for an organizational superior through
the confluence of various discourses (Ray).
    Such observations transcend individual happenstance in organi-
zational life, since they go beyond the anecdotal to identify systemic
106    RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


issues that ultimately affect organizational authorship. Researchers’
treatments of these themes prompt the following observations on
writers’ workplace subjectivities:

      • Writers not only work in discourse, they endure the effects of
      specific discourses in local cultures (along with other culture mem-
      bers) as these discourses shape knowledge and behavior.
      • One of the effects of discourse in a culture is that it positions
      different culture members differently, in concert with organiza-
      tional structures and dynamics, and, as indicated in the chapter
      epigraph, often limits a subject’s scope and range of action.

Taking Inventory

As all archaeological work benefits from reflective inventories of
shards, so this section of Writing Workplace Cultures concludes with
reflections over the shards in this chapter and the two preceding it. This
chapter aimed to match discursive features of workplace cultures to
organizational structures and writers’ positions and practices. The
multiple classifications of researchers and their research into several
lists can prompt us to imagine unities that might take form across these
many situations where currently no unities exist and to place the real-
ization of such unities on our agendas as practicing writers and/or
collaborating scholars.
     On this agenda would therefore figure the reconceptualizing of
writers’ skills, currently undertheorized as they contribute to organi-
zational authorship and cultural reproduction. Similarly under-theo-
rized are “mundane” forms of workplace writing, forms of instrumen-
tal discourse which, when studied empirically in local cultures, yield
insight on the subject positions they create and implicate and on the
realities they produce and reproduce. Scholars in professional writing
can aid professional writers by reviewing professional writers’ skills
through the lenses of cultural theories to render the representations of
these skills—in educational institutions and in the workplace—ad-
equately complex. Scholars and professional writers can collaborate
in researching mundane forms of workplace writing to render under-
standings of these forms similarly complex.
     Also on this agenda are writers’ current statuses in workplace
cultures, wrought largely by the poor epistemological framing of dis-
course work that sends writers as professionals into workplace envi-
                          DISCURSIVE FEATURES OF WORKPLACE WRITING CULTURES   107


ronments without the theoretical leverage necessary to argue and sub-
stantiate their contributions to the organizational mission and the local
culture in the emerging high-value economy. To aid writers at least
partly in rectifying low status, scholars can work to elaborate new and
richer theories of authorship as informed by the collective authorships
of workplace realities, focusing at the very least on the inadequacy of
theorizing authorship as an individual phenomenon when organiza-
tional authorship is always collective. In this era of national cultural
shift from an economy grounded in high-volume industries and the
structures of authority they carried to high-value industries and the
new structures of authority required for success, the links between
authority and authorship should serve as topics not only for intellec-
tual inquiry but also as vital research for development.
     The agenda thus calls for reconfiguring much instruction in dis-
course theory for future and even current discourse workers. It also
calls for instruction in other areas: writers will witness their organiza-
tional roles inflected by many other roles, and instruction in role theo-
ries could equip them to deal with this reality. Similarly, as culture
members who encounter many discourses as they mediate organiza-
tional authorship, they will require instruction in theory and method-
ology that equips them to perceive and interpret these discourses,
whether they come from specific “discourse communities” or emanate
from other organizational entities. Professional writers of the future
could also benefit from instruction in organizational theory, thus en-
tering the workplace equipped with some of the same theoretical back-
ground of the people who will be managing them.
     In these workplaces, writers will enjoy unique organizational po-
sitions, frequently glimpsing workplace subcultures as they mediate
organizational authorship. Through the mode of learning that writ-
ing represents, they will be positioned intellectually to produce knowl-
edge on the local culture that no other professional can produce. When
this learning is informed not only by organizational theory and research
methodology but also by discourse theory that elaborates on writing
as inscription of local cultures, writers will be endowed with a reflex-
ivity that can serve the individual and collectivities. As links to other
cultures—through their occasional functions as liaisons, their experi-
ences in other organizational cultures, and their membership in virtual
communities of writers that will form and share knowledge—writers
can one day convincingly claim their rights and responsibilities in or-
ganizational goals and end products.
108   RESEARCH ON DISCURSIVE WORK IN ORGANIZATIONAL SETTINGS


     At the top of our agenda should figure in bold letters the fact that
discourse theories have advanced phenomenally in the last two dec-
ades while popular understandings of writing have remain largely un-
changed. Practicing writers, as a class of professionals who regularly
enact composition tenets, will be positioned strategically in the national
economic shift from high-volume production to high-value production,
and it behooves us all to equip these writers with understandings of
recent discourse theory and to imagine along with them the implica-
tions. As information technology renders discourse work increasingly
key to national economy and even to national identity, writers’ poten-
tial to play a greater role in organizational authorship is likely to ex-
pand dramatically.
     An agenda stemming from this preliminary archaeology thus has
immediate implications for writers and scholars concerning at least
three phenomena. First, the nature of writing instruction represented
in the academy is only beginning to be dislodged from epistemologies
grounded in formalism and liberal humanism. The gleanings presented
in these three chapters make it possible to envision educational expe-
riences in discourse work that represent this work in greater complexity
and enable a greater number of students to engage in it productively
and meaningfully. Second, our representation, teaching, and reflexive
use of writing in the workplace could serve to augment popular no-
tions of writers’ expertise. And finally, interventions will change as
scholars intervene in discursive subjectivities theoretically and practi-
cally through teaching, and as writers team with scholars to lay ground-
work for interventions in organizational authorship theoretically and
pragmatically. Part three undertakes exploration of these phenomena.
PART THREE

Implications and Applications
(Links to Other Shards, Other Sites)
6   REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN
    THE ACADEMY

    It is a question of the discursive representation of interests, of
    calculation and hypothesis. There is no class essence and there
    are no unified class actors, founded in the objectivity of a social
    interest; there are, however, processes of class formation, without
    absolute origin or telos, with definite discursive conditions, and
    played out through particular institutional forms and balances of
    power, through calculations and miscalculations, through desires,
    and fears, and fantasies.
                     —John Frow, Cultural Studies and Cultural Value

    So, what questions does this [class discussion of flexible labor in
    a post-Fordist economy] raise for us as knowledge workers? As
    information workers?
                           —Professor Tom Moylan, in class, 4/4/95




                                                                          111
112   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS




T  he “It” in John Frow’s comment above refers to class formation, a
topic immanent to inquiries into workplace lives. Like many other
cultural theorists, Frow observes the inadequacy of models of socio-
economic class grounded in traditional Marxism which posit class
interests as objectively pre-given, determined exclusively by economic
forces. He proposes a provocative interplay of economic, political, and
ideological forces shaping the processes of class formation, and he
points out in so doing that he understands “ideology” not in the ar-
chaic sense that allowed attribution of “false consciousness” to workers
who were unable to discern their own best interests but rather in the
sense of symbolic representations that we all make to ourselves daily.
His focus on processes seems extremely valuable as composition schol-
ars collaborate with students in exploring discursive subjectivities under
the process paradigm, particularly in light of the speed with which
workplace writing processes—and jobs—change in postmodern times.
Equally valuable for such collaboration in exploring discursive con-
struction of subjectivities beyond the academy is his attention to insti-
tutional forms as they shape (and are shaped by) discursive conditions.
Particularly provocative in his formulation is the reference to desires,
fears, and fantasies—for such affective elements, often excluded from
high theory, speak to the heart of all writers’ work.
     Among the representations of themselves as writers in chapter 2,
the researchers in this book frequently noted their affective selves: writ-
ing exposes oneself, writing is linked to feelings, writing elicits emo-
tional reactions. The huge success of expressivist composition instruc-
tion in the 1980s and 1990s is owed, no doubt, to this aspect of writing,
particularly since this style of instruction came in the wake of formal-
ist hegemony in literary studies and concomitant current-traditional
epistemology in composition, along with its institutional ghettoizing
that granted so little focus to writerly affect and worldly aspirations
in discursive engagement. Yet expressivism is decidedly modernist, pos-
iting the writing self as unified and essentialized, a “real author” in-
tent upon tapping that innermost self and relaying it to paper as if
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   113


unmediated. This epistemology, epitomized by approaches such as Peter
Elbow’s “Closing My Eyes As I Speak: An Argument for Ignoring
Audience,” appeals to the liberative elements of writing such as articu-
lated by Anne in the epigraph to chapter 1. Expressivism’s narrative
of liberation is momentary and personal, cut off from the world of
work, ignoring a host of issues offered by considering the relationality
between selves and others in identity formation (undeniably one of the
assets of postmodern thinking), and ultimately disempowering for
writers because of its conceptualization of the writerly self in such
narrow terms. At least part of the task of representing discursive work
among ourselves as writers and scholars, with our colleagues, with
coresearchers, and with students, has to do with revisiting the affec-
tive elements of discursive engagement and rethinking them with re-
spect to workplace selves and others. An equally important part of our
task as compositionists is exploring the discursive representations of
interests as they take form in organizational settings and as our episte-
mologies and practices compare with these interests.
     In Frow’s analysis, he speaks of interests as spanning three spheres:
the ideological, the political, and that of production. Class relations
form and reform across these spheres, producing ideological class re-
lations, political class relations, and economic class relations. Frow is
quick to point out that “all social relations are made up of elements
that are simultaneously economic, political, and ideological” (107).
Composition’s postmodern focus on the “subject” as shaped by dis-
cursive forces blends easily with such a framework, if we recall the
philosophical domains for exploring subjectivity as outlined in chap-
ter 1, that is, the political, the psychological, and the social/cultural.
The shards of part two, moreover, provide a basis for exploring the
representations of writers’ interests in the sphere of production, an
element of composition that modernist epistemologies ignore almost
entirely. In this sphere, writers’ positions in the workplace are among
the most tenuous (as illustrated by the frequent observations of high
turnover in this archaeology), rendering Tom Moylan’s question in the
chapter epigraph all the more compelling: what questions does post-
Fordist production raise for information workers and their collabo-
rators in the academy?
     In this chapter I explore some questions that we might raise and
some steps we might take in academic settings to render composition’s
forms more adequate to postmodern professional writing realities, one
that acknowledges the role of language and writing in all three of
114    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Frow’s spheres. I will begin by recalling differences between modern-
ist and postmodernist understandings of discourse, and then I will
sketch the implications of postmodern understandings for writing as
imbricated with value and for writing as always tied to power. Against
this backdrop, I then will present ideas for melding composition stud-
ies with discourse studies more generally. The chapter concludes with
ideas for designing a discourse studies curriculum.

The Content(s) of Postmodern Composing
In The Content of the Form, historian Hayden White critiques dis-
course models that posit form and content as disparate, proposing in
their stead a “performative” model of discourse:
      From the perspective provided by this model, a discourse is regarded as
      an apparatus for the production of meaning rather than as only a vehicle
      for the transmission of information about an extrinsic referent. Thus envi-
      saged, the content of the discourse consists as much of its form as it does
      of whatever information might be extracted from a reading of it. (42)

White makes this claim in the context of a discussion of the “multi-
layeredness” of discourse and its “consequent capacity to bear a wide
variety of interpretations of its meaning” (42), a feature explored at
length in chapter 7’s discussion of writing’s representations in the
workplace. I mention it here not only to signal at least one model of
discourse to be tapped in re-presenting discursive work in the academy
but also to emphasize the value of historical perspective in conduct-
ing archaeological work on discursive processes. White’s claim echoes
that of D. F. McKenzie in his study of formal adjustments to plays in
the eighteenth century (that is, numbering scenes, providing marginal
indications for speakers, etc.) which had distinctive effects on the re-
ception of the work (Chartier 10). “Forms effect meaning,” McKenzie
observes (Chartier 90), and with the radical transformations in media
forms during this last decade, the roles and subjectivities of writers in
effecting meanings through these media and among the many layers
of discourse that exist in workplace cultures require an equally radi-
cal re-presentation.
     As composition scholars tapping postmodern theory and other
theories of subjectivity to aid us in our composer-centered field of in-
quiry, the discursive work of professional writers has strong implica-
tions. Empirical findings in the previous chapters support the theoreti-
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   115


cal contention that composers’ subjectivities are shaped through the
forms of workplace composing. Hence part of our task in re-present-
ing discursive work to students, professional writers, and colleagues
alike must entail ongoing archaeologies, course design, curriculum
design, and a rethinking of classroom methodologies that anticipate
and problematize the discursive constructions of self that will be ef-
fected through workplace composing—that mode of composing most
often employed during most people’s writing lives. James Berlin states
it this way: “If the perceiving subject, the object perceived, and the
community of fellow investigators are all in large part the effects of
linguistic practices, then every discipline must begin with a consider-
ation of the shaping force of discourse in its activities” (Rhetorics 68).
Whether or not other disciplines will eventually take up this task may
well depend upon composition’s capacity to demonstrate the value of
such an undertaking.

Writing and Value

In The Work of Nations, cited briefly in the introduction, former la-
bor secretary Robert Reich traces the evolution of U.S. economic de-
velopment through its shift from the high-volume economy of the early
twentieth century to the high-value economy at century’s end. He
sketches the kind of work and workers that this economy requires,
arriving at three categories of service: routine production services, in-
person services, and symbolic-analytic services (175–77). Professional
writers fall into this last category, because “symbolic analysts solve,
identify, and broker problems by manipulating symbols” (178). This
work is key to the high-value economy, because the value produced
through such work derives from “continuous discovery of new link-
ages between solutions and needs” (85). As symbolic-analytical work
that bestows value, then, writing coexists with other kinds of work at
the heart of this sector of the economy. Yet the potential of professional
writing for infusing value remains underexploited for at least two rea-
sons. The first is that popular conceptions of language and discourse
as mere packaging for thought inhibits full exploitation of language
practices. (Reich’s own discussion of language use conveys this view).
Attempts at measuring technical writers’ “value added” to organiza-
tional products have begun to characterize ever so provisionally the
role of language in discovering linkages between solutions and needs
(Society for Technical Communication), yet even these attempts seem
116    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


to harken to modernist models of discourse, for the most part. Still
dramatically unexplored are the potentials of writing as a mode of
learning and of discourse as an apparatus for the production of mean-
ing—for enhancing all kinds of value throughout workplace cultures,
in the economic domain and in others.
     The second reason why professional writers’ work remains under-
exploited in generating value is that organizational hierarchies remain
largely pyramidal, in spite of the imperative in a high-value economy
to flatten hierarchies and tap workers’ potential more fully. Says Reich:
      The high-value enterprise . . . need not be organized like the old pyramids
      that characterized standardized production, with strong chief executives
      presiding over ever-widening layers of managers, atop an even larger
      group of hourly workers, all following standard operating procedures.
      In fact, the high-value enterprise cannot be organized in this way. (87)

Judging by the organization charts regularly presented in class by re-
searchers in this book, organizational structures in most workplaces
studied remain highly pyramidal, replicating archaic models. Though
many of the organizations studied were not enterprises in the business
sense, 40 percent of them were, and even among these 40 percent only
two organizations—those studied by Leathe and Mary—professed a
flattened hierarchy. A few of the smaller businesses might be perceived
as “flat,” but in most cases the shape derives from size rather than
conscious configuring of organizational structures to tap workers’
expertise to the fullest. Among the government agencies and trade
associations, hierarchy is firmly entrenched and most likely will remain
so ad infinitum, in spite of purported efforts to “reinvent” government.
     These organization charts reflect Sarmiento’s claim from chapter
2—that 95 percent of U.S. companies remain Taylorist in their orga-
nizational structures—which might be explained from several view-
points: the size of the U.S. economy alone permits such organizational
inertia; high-value products in some cases may be produced adequately
through high-volume structures; patriarchal ideology pervades orga-
nizations to such a degree that movements to improve meet numerous
obstacles; and so on. Yet certainly some organizations are destined to
improve soon, and it is worth noting that Mary’s site of study was a
consulting organization on the cutting edge of management studies,
just as Leathe’s site was a contracting agency performing high-level data
analysis and report writing in which labor potential had to be maxi-
mized for the organization to survive.
                                 REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   117


     As other organizations restructure to improve their value in the
sphere of production, professional writers (and allied compositionists)
can strive to improve composition’s enactments and writers’ subjec-
tive work identities by underscoring the ways in which value in the
economic sphere always interleaves with values in the ideological and
political spheres. Such considerations carry at least the following im-
plications: the flattening of hierarchy should logically entail a redis-
tribution of profits among contributors to value; as more workers (in-
cluding writers) enjoy greater roles in discovering new linkages between
needs and solutions, they should also have a say in the workplace
cultures they “write” in so doing; because professional authorship
(discussed at length in chapter 7) will increasingly incorporate users
into the authoring (and hence production) phase, organizations will
need to reconceptualize their consumers philosophically, reposition-
ing them from targets to sources. These implications may appear uto-
pian, yet the logic of enhancing composition epistemology and prac-
tices as this archaeology suggests makes them wholly pragmatic, as this
chapter and those following will make clear.

Writing and Power

To speak of writing and power is to invoke the political sphere, a sphere
around which composition has cut a wide berth during most of the
twentieth century. This berth helps explain the plight of compositionists
generally as portrayed by Susan Miller: because composition has re-
mained ancillary to the “real” intellectual work of English departments,
its teacher-scholars have remained marginalized in academic power
structures. Miller addresses the mechanisms and epistemologies under-
girding this marginalization at length, reminding us that we have much
at stake in this matter as concerns the status of all writing teachers and
researchers at work in the academy. From another perspective, James
Berlin reminds us that not to address the interconnections of power
and writing is to do our students a great disservice:
    Colleges ought to offer a curriculum that places preparation for work
    within a comprehensive range of democratic educational concerns. Re-
    gardless of whether students are headed for the highest or the lowest levels
    of the job market, we ought to provide them at least with an understand-
    ing of the larger operations of the work force. (“English Studies” 223)

As discussed in chapter 2, the principal reason why composition has
118   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


never undertaken such political projects hinges on university structures
in general (as they replicate the structures of “scientific management”)
and English department structures in particular (as they maintain a
hegemony of literary studies over writing studies: Sullivan and Porter’s
“curricular geography” appropriately locates those genres of writing
associated with the workplace as always secondary in English depart-
ment structures and practices, including allocation of resources.) Read-
ing their geography gives one pause (see figure 2, chapter 2), if only to
reconsider representations of literary studies (and composition) as
somehow independent of the workplace and the formation of work-
ers, for example. As argued extensively in current critical theory, by
reinforcing the “author function” that establishes systems of discur-
sive (and aesthetic) exclusivity, literary studies work to reinforce the
cultural status quo and workers’ placements (and purviews) in work-
place cultures.
     At the same time, the unidirectional arrows from professional
writing to the workplace signal a vital element of writing that has re-
mained largely unexploited in the academy: the element of power as
it inflects discursive work. With the turn towards theories of subjec-
tivities in the humanities and in English literature more specifically, the
inextricable relation between knowledge and power has been a recur-
ring focus. Thus a cultural studies perspective in literary interpreta-
tion might focus on rereading the canon for the ways in which power
has represented itself and solidified ideological support under the ae-
gis of “knowledge,” for example. The power/knowledge unity has thus
provoked valuable classroom experience for students in the realm of
discursive consumption, while affording very little experience in the
realm of discursive production—in spite of entreaties by such schol-
ars as Lester Faigley to reconsider “the subject” of composition.
     This lacuna in classroom discursive experience derives from sev-
eral sources, several of which are outlined in Dias et al.’s Worlds Apart:
Acting and Writing in Academic and Workplace Contexts. The authors
discuss the texts produced by writers in workplace settings (see par-
ticularly p. 226–30) as always already imbued with power, both within
the organization and on the part of the organization, in contrast to the
demonstration texts students produce in academic writing forums.
Because workplace writing constitutes realities and because these re-
alities are always filled with power relations, this discursive form is
most fertile for investigating the composition of the subject in discourse,
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   119


which necessarily entails investigating how class interests are “played
out through particular institutional forms and balances of power,” as
Frow puts it in the chapter epigraph. Conducting such investigations
will require ongoing collaboration among academics and professional
writers, which in turn will require inventive research designs and novel
conceptualizations of partnerships. If academics maintain the episte-
mological allegiance that the field of composition demands—that is,
composer-centered research that eyes the trivialization of any discourse
with skepticism and any positioning of writers that relieves them of
responsibility and rights towards agencies at work as unacceptable—
then fears of cultural reproduction often raised in discussions of “ser-
vice” writing should rest allayed. And if predictions by labor research-
ers such as Robert Reich are even vaguely on target, then it will be in
the best interests of most high-value organizations to deem writing
subjects and writing cultures part and parcel of the enterprise.
     In chapter 8 I discuss rationales, dynamics, and epistemologies of
research on discursive subjectivities in the contact zones between the
workplace and the academy, after a look in chapter 7 at representing
discursive work in the workplace and reconfiguring professional writ-
ers’ expertise as implied by this archaeological work. Clearly, much
work lies ahead in knowledge movement between the academy and
the workplace. To prepare such work, we might extrapolate from this
class of professionals known as professional writers to posit a new
theoretical class of “discourse specialists.” Such a class would enable
us to designate writers’ work with more precision than the terms
“knowledge worker” or “information worker” voiced by cultural stud-
ies scholar Tom Moylan in the chapter epigraph. As valuable as these
terms have been in enabling cultural studies to counter monetary capital
with cultural capital in knowledge/power struggles, neither quite cap-
tures the specificity of professional writing, its discursive roots, and
its actors’ subjectivities. In A Theory of Discourse, James Kinneavy re-
views some of these discursive roots along with terms he considered
in naming his project, disqualifying “composition” in 1971 because
of its limiting connotations (4). Nearly three decades later, in the light
of composition’s exciting and provocative reconfiguring of its “sub-
jects” and with the possibility of more adequately investigating “for-
mations” beyond academic walls, we might return to this pioneer’s
quandary and deem that our project now merits the mantle of “dis-
course” and our writers the title of “discourse specialist.”
120    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Melding Composition with Discourse Studies

In Composition in the University, Sharon Crowley reviews the “pro-
cess movement” critically, noting its collusion with current-traditional
epistemology:

      The easy accommodation of process-oriented strategies to current-tra-
      ditionalism suggests that process and product have more in common than
      is generally acknowledged in professional literature about composition,
      where the habit of contrasting them conceals the fact of their epistemo-
      logical consistency. A truly paradigmatic alternative to current-tradition-
      alism would question the modernism in which it is immersed and the
      institutional structures by means of which it is administered. (212)

The institutional structures that administer composition are those of
the scientifically managed university and of the narrowly defined En-
glish “as literature” outlined above. The postmodern alternative to the
modernism of composition entails broadening its borders to include
all discourse as it is produced and consumed and all composers as both
subjects and agents of discourse. Doing so allows us to rethink com-
position fundamentally as an inquiry into discursive subjectivity and
to posit as one of composition’s aims that of enhancing composers’
capacities to perceive and reflect upon their subjectivities as they take
form among specific determining discourses, most notably those of the
workplace. Nearly all college and university enrollees will assume active
lives as symbolic analysts, and as such will assume specific positions
as both agents and subjects in circuits of discursive production and
consumption. A truly paradigmatic alternative to current-traditional-
ism could begin with this fact alone to problematize the ways in which
all who study writing enter into discourse and sustain positions therein.
     For those whose professional status will be that of “writer” and
for future professionals in other classes, too, theories of subjectivity
in discourse rendered accessible through case studies and reflexive work
in the classroom could become valuable knowledge for assessing later
agencies in organizational processes. The domains of such theory will
evolve as we all struggle to come to grips with entry into discourse,
but at the very least we can begin with partial domains as various dis-
ciplines and fields have developed them to date. Against the back-
ground of chapter 1 and this chapter’s introduction as each sketches
postmodern approaches to understanding subjectivity in domains from
the psychological and the sociological to the political, ideological, and
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   121


economic, I sketch some ideas for exploring subjectivities of writers
as part of discourse studies. The discussion makes use of researchers’
topics and themes, selected researchers’ work, and recent trends in
composition to suggest ways in which composition studies might meld
with discourse studies more generally, the better to garner political and
epistemological clout within the academy and without.

Psychological and Sociological Subjectivities

If we accept the postmodern tenet that the workplace writing subject
takes form among the discourses that obtain in any given organiza-
tional culture, then part of our task as compositionists becomes that
of tracing the ways in which a writer’s “I” gets deployed by the dis-
courses in a local culture. Within the confines of a classroom, such
tracing is impossible, yet approaches to and mechanics for such trac-
ing are perfect topics for classroom work. Gwen’s research on self-
documentation demonstrates that practitioners in many professions
come to their work fully versed in documenting their work—to avoid
litigation, to substantiate steps taken in a process, and so forth. Writ-
ers rarely receive such instruction. However, writers in classrooms are
frequently required to keep journals on their readings or writings—as
a basis for class discussion, as springboard material for “transactional”
writing, or as a nongraded discursive effort in tandem with the graded.
The practice of “journaling,” now common in composition, might be
refocused in some cases to help writers trace their subjectivities in com-
pleting other discursive tasks. One imagines a course in which writers
must complete a project, collaboratively or singly, and during which
they also keep meticulous journals on their decisions, actions, pro-
cesses, etc. Workshops could be dedicated to analyzing the “I’s” of the
journals along the lines of the analysis in chapter 1, to help writers
perceive the social forces entering discourse through the “I’s” they posit
and to help them perceive forces that could not enter through these
“I’s.” Conducting rhetorical analysis of the writing tasks as assigned
in conjunction with these journal analyses could lay the groundwork
for writers who will later compare on-the-job assignments with sub-
jectivities they are able to document.
     At the same time that we ask composers to identify and character-
ize these subjectivities, we might ask them to focus portions of jour-
nal entries on their affective response to composing work on the project
with which they are engaged. Based on documentations of affect, we
122   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


might revisit cliché concepts such as “writer’s block,” for example, to
map discursive forces at work to produce, sustain, or undo such block-
ing. Most valuable in this exercise would be not so much the “unblock-
ing” as tracing the discursive impulses that appeared to engender the
initial stasis as well as those that enabled writing. At opposite ends of
our grand narrative spectrum lie the mental turmoils of the singular
artist at grips with the muses and the workaday writer churning out
prose; in between lie many narratives, many discourses, and their sub-
jects, which can enable us to construct impetuses in instrumental dis-
course as personally powerful as the mythical impetuses of artistic
creation. Catherine Belsey speaks of a “concept of a dialectical rela-
tionship between concrete individuals and the language in which their
subjectivities are constructed” to support “the concept of subjectivity
as in process” (66). Such journal work could form valuable baseline
documentation for exploring such a dialectical relationship, while fram-
ing “process” within composing in ways that revise the modernist un-
derpinnings noted by Sharon Crowley. Writers in various local work-
place cultures who undertake journal work on subjectivities-in-process
might likewise compare their entries with the many representations of
psychological and sociological realities in chapter 5, the better to imag-
ine new unities.

Political Subjectivities

In exploring convergences between feminist research and postmodern
theory, Patti Lather speaks of “seeing subjectivity as both socially pro-
duced in language, at conscious and unconscious levels, and as a site
of struggle and potential change” (118). At unconscious levels, sub-
jectivity is produced by workplace discourses that position subjects in
specific ways with respect to other subjects in the local culture and
which implicitly specify subjects’ ranges of action in organizational
work. Identifying these discourses and positions—that is, shifting them
from the unconscious to the conscious—is a difficult task best achieved
in workshop environments. To prepare such work in the classroom,
we might prompt readings of first-person accounts similar to those
discussed above, this time with an emphasis on implicit shaping of
authority—in its scope and nature. If the future workplace of symbolic
analysts is to be one of high-value, then clearly authority must be al-
located on the basis of knowledge rather than organizational position,
even if this allocation is temporary and malleable in tandem with other
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   123


factors. Moreover, because writers are a class of professionals that
nurtures a particular self-consciousness with respect to one’s relation-
ships to the discourses in which an “I” appear, studying writers will
need methods to help them glean contours of this local authority within
larger discursive arenas.
     One method entails revisiting the concept of “voice,” a mainstay
of modernist thought yet particularly fecund for postmodern interpre-
tations because of its metaphorical nature, as demonstrated by Carl
Leggo through the questions he asks that reframe “voice” in postmod-
ern terms. If we free “voice” from the essentialized notions of subjec-
tivity typical of modernist thought, that is, that writers find their “true
voices” connected with some essential, innate characteristic, then we
can begin to hear other murmurings. In “Voice Lessons in a Poststruc-
tural Key,” Linda Brodkey and I took up this task, drawing on the
material language theory of David Silverman and Brian Torode that
provides interpretations of subjects’ appearances in discourse as always
inflected by the power relations with other theoretical subjects. Their
analysis is grounded in Louis Althusser’s notion of the subject as in-
terpellated by ideological state apparatuses and seems to respond to
critiques of Althusser’s somewhat mechanistic structuralism precisely
by tracing the shifting power relations from moment to moment in
discursive appearances. One begins by understanding a “voice” as the
relationship between a discourse and its identifiable subjects, then by
way of articulation theory to discern “how ideological elements come,
under certain conditions, to cohere together within a discourse, and a
way of asking how they do or do not become articulated, at specific
junctures, to certain political subjects” (Hall 53). For writers building
their repertoires of techniques for tracing contours of their subjectivities
in discourses in which they are implicated, understanding a voice as
carrying vestiges of state apparatuses that position us all with respect
to each other by virtue of power rather than knowledge can foster an
acuity for hearing these voices in mundane workplace discourses.
     A glance at the multiple discourses and underlying discourses iden-
tified by researchers in chapter 5 provides a preliminary array of dis-
courses likely to be encountered by writers in workplace cultures. Mul-
tiple discourses—from business discourse to legal discourse to news
discourses, by way of many incidental discourses along the way—will
shape the voices of organizational documents; underlying discourses
with intentions from the (ostensibly) benign to the flagrantly malig-
nant will likewise direct voices. Practicing writers can benefit from
124   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


contemplating the voices turned up by archaeologies and analyzing
them with the critical skills nurtured through discourse studies. Even
before entering workplace cultures, writers might analyze extant ex-
amples of workplace documents for the voices they air and the atten-
dant subject positions of culture members. David Jolliffe’s readings of
workplace documents for identity formation, using Norman Fair-
clough’s notion of “interdiscursivity,” might aid readers in framing and
elaborating such analysis, particularly as he links agency as implied in
training documents as contrasted with real organizational purview
(347). In classrooms, writers might tap the practice of journaling once
again to frame similar readings and to compose individual techniques
for constructing such frames, perhaps using double entries to react to
and analyze affective responses in the process. Beyond the walls of the
classroom and in the interest of shaping professional class solidarity
in the interest of change, writers might share observations on subject
positions in workplace discourses by means of discussion lists and other
virtual forums, an idea forwarded by Cynthia L. Selfe and Richard J.
Selfe Jr. and addressed at greater length in chapter 8.

Ideological Subjectivities

Though analyses of political subjectivities frequently subsume analy-
ses of ideology (as Hall’s comment above implies), it is worth our while
as part of an inquiry into discourse production to create a separate
category, if only to demystify the notion of ideology and to name it as
a force immanent to all discourse. Catherine Belsey defines ideology
as “the sum of the ways in which people both live and represent to
themselves their relationship to the conditions of their existence” (42),
thus establishing ideology as a force with which we all contend. As
chapters 4 and 5 demonstrate, when professional writers undertake
analyses of workplace cultures in which they are (or might be) mem-
bers, the representations that they compose give them the occasion to
ponder their conditions of existence within the organization and with
respect to other professional classes which they otherwise simply would
not have.
     When we narrow ideological analysis to workplace cultures, con-
ditions of existence range from the purely physical “cube city” (Adam,
final ethnography) inhabited by most professional writers to economic
and political conditions in the processes of production. In his three
                                REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   125


spheres of class formation discussed earlier, Frow underscores relations
among classes, in the process identifying “semiotic constructions of the
subject form” (106), which suggests discerning more fully the ways in
which the professional class of writer take form via using the appear-
ances of an “I” in writers’ depictions of their relationships to the con-
ditions of their workplace existences. Because class formation is always
in process (albeit with certain characteristics that remain fairly con-
stant), questioning processes (and hypothetical end products) can aid
writers in discerning the subjectivities they are invited to and obliged
to inhabit in the workplace. Workshops and virtual forums seem in-
dispensable to such questioning and to inquiry into the range of inter-
ests which this professional class claims and thereby uses to establish
relations with other professional classes. Particularly in the context of
high-value production, writers and researchers will want to follow the
leads of Frow and others who seek to uncover relations between ideo-
logical value and value in other spheres. One might, in fact, devote an
entire course to such theoretical inquiry, rendered rich by case studies
and richer still by pondering the moments when “discourse” under-
stood in the modernist sense takes on fuller significance through
postmodern framings. The effects of discourse outlined in the last two
sections of chapter 5, from withdrawal of engagement to heightened
senses of awareness regarding self-documentation to the production
of waste, constitute ideological shaping of subjectivity that certainly
bears scrutiny.
     Patti Lather sees ideology as “the stories a culture tells itself about
itself” (2), suggesting that an analysis of ideological subjectivity as
discursively shaped incorporate observations made by autoethno-
graphers on the stories workplace cultures tell about themselves. In-
trinsic to ethnographic methodology since the interpretive turn has been
the principle of reflexivity, the ongoing consideration of the researcher’s
social, political, economic, cultural, and other origins as they influence
perception of and inscription of a culture. As James Clifford states it,
“every version of an ‘other,’ wherever found, is also a construction of
a ‘self’” (23, emphasis mine). Clifford’s point was to signal the move-
ment of ethnography in 1986 into areas previously reserved for other
discursive practices (e.g., sociology, literature, cultural critique); a cen-
tral thesis to this archaeology is that one might easily enlarge this realm
to include so-called instrumental discourses. With each positing of an
“other” via the products of an organization comes a construction of
126    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


the writerly “self,” which, when compared with inquiries into subjec-
tivity suggested above, can yield insight on the writers’ workplace lives,
the salubrity of their workplace cultures, and the agencies that take
form through the practices and structures that discursively shape con-
ceptions of the “other.”
     This point seems particularly relevant to the “ethos” of compos-
ing, addressed at length in chapter 7, and to revisions of “process
pedagogy” that heed Sharon Crowley’s critique of it. According to Zora
Neale Hurston scholar Michelle Smith-Bermiss, Hurston’s approach
to autoethnography was one that underscored the process aspects of
such writing:

      She had a very studied “anti-scientific” approach. She rejects the illusion
      of scholarly impartiality and looks at ethnographic writing, and particu-
      larly autoethnographic writing, I think, as a process rather than a rev-
      elation. She doesn’t sit and say, “Well, I’ve noted x number of facts and
      observed this amount of time and so I know something, concrete and fi-
      nite,” but rather this is something that gets worked out again and again.
      (in class, 3/18/98)

Because she understands “process” in ways that dislodge it from end
products, in ways that in fact defy holding up any one artifact as exem-
plar—the better to situate writing as a valuable ongoing reconstruc-
tion of selves and others and the epistemologies that link them—her
approach to autoethnography could reinvigorate process pedagogy. By
integrating the concerns of autoethnographic subjects in process into
discourse studies designed for writers, we might imagine curricula that
will serve writers in the workplace as they ponder their discursive
subjectivities and plan courses of action to reshape them as they deem
pertinent.
    The notion of reflexivity is invaluable to autoethnographers, too,
as they train “new eyes” to view familiar surroundings, constructing
new “I’s” in the process. Whether or not professional writers are for-
mally engaged in cultural analyses of the workplace, guarding against
lethargy in interpreting workplace cultures and the constructions of
one’s subjectivity within them seems vital not only to personal mental
health (Challie, final ethnography) but also to a sense of connection
to the ongoing processes of professional class formation sketched
above. This aspect of subjectivity is explored at greater length in the
discussion of intersubjective research in contact zones in chapter 8.
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   127


Economic Subjectivities

Discourse studies focused on economic subjectivities might seem quite
foreign to the field of composition, yet the imbrication of economic
class relations with those in the political and ideological spheres make
such studies indispensable. These studies would begin with an organ-
ization’s bottom line and then break it down into its components, trac-
ing salaries for all professionals involved along with their contributions
to the organization’s product. To the extent possible, analyses of end
value and value added by contributors would be conducted. Such
analyses would both render visible the subtleties of division of labor
and more importantly delineate the symbolic capital that various classes
of professionals bring to the organization’s goals and missions. Sym-
bolic capital, for writers, translates into fungible contributions to an
organization’s end products and to its local culture, an aspect often
elided by current-traditional understandings of discourse as mere com-
municative packaging.
     Through such explorations of subjectivity as shaped and reshaped
through specific organizational structures and practices articulated to
varieties of discursive conditions, composition could begin to realize
some of the goals staked out by compositionists eyeing the postmodern
condition. In the following pages are presented some ideas for specific
curricula aimed at these goals.

Designing Professional Writing Curricula
One of the many boons of the emergence of composition as a field has
been the broadening of the conceptualization of curricula at the post-
secondary level. At most U.S. colleges and certainly at research uni-
versities in the twentieth century, curricula have been for the most part
construed narrowly as bodies of knowledge to be imparted to students,
usually by various departments who claim dominion over particular
ways of knowing. This concept of curriculum, termed by Eisner and
Vallance the “academic rationalist,” has its roots in university struc-
tures dating to the twelfth century (Holmes). Yet other concepts of
curricula exist, tied to different philosophical traditions and focusing
less on predetermined bodies of knowledge and more on other aspects
of teaching and learning in institutionalized settings. One such con-
cept identifies the focus of curriculum to be students’ “self-actualiza-
128    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


tion” (Eisner and Vallance), and one of composition’s achievements
has been to validate this concept as part of college and university cur-
ricula. With the advent of process pedagogy and composer-centered
instruction, students’ self-actualization has assumed new epistemologi-
cal status—which is no small issue in light of the forgoing discussions
of subjectivities and earlier discussions of discursive selves. The ideas
for writing course conceptualization that follow, grounded in research-
ers’ analyses of workplace cultures, assume such an approach to cur-
riculum development.
     Like the ideas for exploring writers’ subjectivities above, these
writing courses envision a paradigmatic alternative to current-tradi-
tionalism suggested by Sharon Crowley. She expands upon such cur-
ricular alternatives:
      Many universities and colleges already offer an array of upper-division
      courses in creative, technical, and professional writing. I would like to
      see this array of courses supplemented by a vertical elective curriculum
      in composing, a curriculum that examines composing both in general and
      as it takes place in specific rhetorical situations such as workplaces and
      community decision making. . . . The topmost reaches of an undergradu-
      ate curriculum in composing would study histories of writing, debate the
      politics of literacy, and investigate the specialized composing tactics and
      rhetorics that have evolved in disciplines, professions, civic groups,
      women’s organizations, social movements and political parties—to name
      only a few sites where such investigation could fruitfully take place. (Com-
      position 262)

The ideas for courses that follow could be used at both undergradu-
ate and graduate levels, dovetailing with the kinds of histories, debates,
and investigations sketched by Crowley.

Organizational Studies for Writers

We need courses that explore the constellation of organizational struc-
tures and processes of information flow within them, conceived not
for managers who oversee these structures and flows (as so many
courses in organizational studies are) but for writers who will tap into
them, use them in their writing to enhance values in the organization,
and monitor them as they imply new links between needs and solutions
and as they reflect the workplace cultures that writers write. Because
writing instruction in the United States has for so long been grounded
                               REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   129


in singular authorship, writers’ views of writing as linked to systems
thinking—one of the crucial components of a symbolic analyst’s edu-
cation, according to Reich (230)—are underdeveloped. Writing courses
in on-line environments hold great potential to help students recon-
ceptualize authorship as plural and their places in it as complex; if we
can add dimensions to these courses that incorporate elements of or-
ganizational systems, “systems thinking” may become integral to un-
derstandings of authorship much in the ways that it is already inte-
gral to understandings of phenomena in other disciplines preparing
students for the workplace. (Ironically, English departments, which cus-
tomarily assume progressive stances on campus and cultural issues,
send their charges into the workplace with similar stances, perhaps,
yet with little in the way of the institutional knowledge and strategies
needed to promote these stances, as compared with graduates from
other disciplines.) We need courses that equip writers intellectually with
knowledge of organizational pasts and presents.
     In the research sites represented in this archaeology alone, we can
see organizational structures and practices varying dramatically de-
pending upon the size and nature of the organization, from the infor-
mal structures and ad hoc practices of small businesses to the rigid,
hierarchical structures and protocol-laden practices of most trade as-
sociations, by way of vast government structures that target the pub-
lic as audience through layers of mediation or public relations firms
that target the public as consumer in the interests of a client—with a
wealth of implications for writing along the way. Researchers’ topics
and themes in analyzing the workplace cultures of these sites suggest
that we include in courses on organizational studies the genesis and
forms of mission statements, policies, and organizational procedures,
as writers write them and live them. Case studies could provide valu-
able concrete examples in situ and could allow comparisons with sub-
cultural dynamics as sketched in archaeologies such as this (see chap-
ter 4), perhaps even highlighting the dynamics resulting from specific
players and organizational alliances. What kinds of documents do
specific organizations author? What are the origins, the evolutions, and
the effects of these documents? What kinds of relations and ideolo-
gies do they authorize? What connections can be made, theoretically
and historically, to other discursive work, including the discourses of
surveillance and panoptics of the nineteenth century as they shaped
the ideological panoptics of increasingly archaic organizational struc-
130    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


tures at the end of the twentieth century? What ideas do such connec-
tions spur among writers for the kinds of value they will seek in high-
value organizations?

Cultural Histories and Traditions

In addition to studies of contemporary organizations, we need histori-
cal studies of the deeds and effects of organizations. This would in-
clude copies of documents and depictions of contributors’ roles in elab-
orating them, if possible, as these documents constitute deeds and
frequently track the effects, both planned and unforeseen, as they ripple
through local and larger cultures. Writers could also benefit from ana-
lyzing documents that record these deeds. Alongside any discursive
representations that organizations might want to furnish, research by
independent historians focused on discursive constructions in histori-
cal contexts could aid discourse workers enormously. Such a course
would explore this general question: Where and how has writing (and
different kinds of writerly subjectivities) been shaped in organizational
America? To be eschewed would be the cliché accounts focusing on a
“great man’s” vision and its enactment through the organization in
favor of the day-by-day discursive operations and writers’ roles and
subjectivities in them, not unlike the historical accounts of daily French
life by Braudel.
     Writers could not only study these accounts but reenact scenarios,
perhaps role-playing to collectively reproduce discursive moments, then
compare this reproduction with studies of discursive subjectivities in
other courses and with historical contexts surrounding these accounts.
As we approach an age in which whole generations of writers have no
familiarity with such tools as carbon paper or Liquid Paper, reenact-
ments that link specific technologies with specific organizational forms,
missions, and the discursive subjectivities they produced could provide
writers with great insight on their current technologies and the forms
and subjectivities linked to them. Johndan Johnson-Eilola’s observa-
tions on the ways in which hypertext composing in workplace settings
affects cultural dynamics are pertinent:
      In traditional cases workers experiencing difficulties or having questions
      about their task are likely to consult a colleague or supervisor for help.
      But because the integrated hypertext and task allows them to find quickly
      the information they need to complete their task, workers are less likely
                                 REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   131


    to consult a source outside their currently assigned work area or task (that
    assignment can be explicit or implicit)—physical, social, and mental pat-
    terns and processes lose distinction. (Nostalgic 82)

As workplace composing becomes increasingly hypertextual, we will
need courses in cultural histories and traditions that track changes in
organizational social patterns alongside changes in writing technolo-
gies, to enhance writers’ understandings of their discursive work as
ideologically shaped by the technologies channeling it. Alongside such
courses could come inquiries into specific industries, and the discur-
sive practices and traditions associated with them. Such studies might
enable writers in different kinds of industries to nurture senses of sub-
jectivity tied to valuable discursive traditions and intellectually strong
enough to resist the scuttling of tradition by Taylorization. The case
of Red’s local newspaper office installing time clocks for reporters
comes to mind.
     Christina Haas analyzes histories and traditions of writing through
the lens of technology studies, suggesting ways in which such studies
could dovetail with writing courses aimed at imparting wisdom on
cultural histories and traditions:

    Today’s writing technologies have a heritage that can be traced back to
    the earliest tools of writing. At each “stage” of a contemporary writing
    technology’s development, theories of use and practice shape how it was,
    and is, developed. . . . The effects of any given technology—here, com-
    puter tools—will multiply in complexity with every level of development
    and every new use to which the technology is put. Unraveling the threads
    of technology development and use, through historical as well as empirical
    studies, will be the kind of interdisciplinary project that Technology Stud-
    ies can pursue. (229)

     One might retrace the histories and powers of writing in ways simi-
lar to that of Henri-Jean Martin, who traces ways in which cultural
processes and understandings of written discourse have intertwined
through the ages. We might ponder, with Martin and many others, the
ways in which interpersonal subjectivities shifted dramatically with the
advent of the printing press as it reshaped the dissemination of writ-
ing and hence constructions and understandings of authorship (see
Woodmansee) and as it shaped a new autonomy for readers. And as
we ponder ways in which subjectivities will be reshaped by the print-
ing press’s twentieth-century equivalent, the computer, we might also
132    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


reconsider the implications of reader autonomy and reading formations.
Tony Bennett and Janet Woollacott’s discussion of reading formations,
valuable in probing the ways in which curricular choices shape subjec-
tivities in discursive consumption, could in this way be linked to stud-
ies of writing formations and their shaping of discursive production.
Such studies seem necessary, given the fact that historical events such
as the invention of the printing press have constructed reading as a sol-
itary act, pushing us to conceptualize writing similarly, when current
thought in both the workplace and the academy tell us that such a
conceptualization is woefully inadequate. As subjects who not only
produce discourse but also inhabit subjectivities that discourses have
produced, writers dwell in circuits of production and consumption
subtly shaped by organizational histories and traditions, raising ques-
tions of intertextuality much in the way that such questions have been
linked to literary authorship yet broadening the database to include
texts drawn from virtually any discursive practice or tradition relevant
to a particular workplace culture (see discussions by Brady and by
Selzer on intertextuality and professional writing).

Collaborative Composition

For years, Andrea Lunsford and Lisa Ede have been exhorting us to
conceptualize composition as a collaborative endeavor and to offer
more courses affording students the experience of composing collabor-
atively and reflecting productively about the processes involved. “If men
and women in the work force frequently write collaboratively,” they
say in Singular Texts/Plural Authors, “should not writing teachers help
prepare them for an important part of their job?” (13) Lately, Their
position has been echoed by numerous scholars in composition (see, for
example, the collection of essays edited by Reagan et al.), and by schol-
ars outside the field such as Robert Reich, in his discussion of collabo-
ration as being among the four skills most vital to symbolic analysts:
      Learning to collaborate, communicate abstract concepts, and achieve a
      consensus are not usually emphasized within formal education, however.
      To the contrary, within most classrooms in the United States . . . the overall
      objective is to achieve quiet and solitary performance of specialized tasks.
      (233)

Almost as stark confirmation of the ways in which the enduring ef-
                                  REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   133


fects of public schooling’s Taylorization in the twentieth century have
increased the rift among social classes, he continues:
    Yet in America’s best classrooms, again, the emphasis has shifted. Instead
    of individual achievements and competition, the focus is on group learn-
    ing. Students learn to articulate, clarify, and then restate for one another
    how they identify and find answers. They learn how to seek and accept
    criticism from peers, solicit help, and give credit to others. They also learn
    to negotiate—to explain their own needs, to discern what others need
    and view things from others’ perspectives, and to discover mutually ben-
    eficial resolutions. This is an ideal preparation for lifetimes of symbolic-
    analytic teamwork. (233)

Reich is not referring to writing classrooms (since so few writing
courses are constructed on a fundamentally collaborative model), yet
his comments hint at the potential of such courses when teamed with
concepts such as writing as a mode of learning—anticipating ways in
which writers in organizational settings can bring their expertise to bear
on organizational value. Lunsford and Ede frame observations not only
with respect to writing’s relations to epistemology (and hence value)
but also with respect to the issue of discursive selves so central to this
archaeology:

    For teachers of writing, however, the most immediate need is for a peda-
    gogy of collaboration, one that would view writing as always shared and
    social; writers as constantly building and negotiating meaning with and
    among others; and evaluation as based at least in part on a “range of
    selves” and on communal efforts. (“Collaborative Authorship” 438)

The dynamics of collective procedures and writing discussed in chap-
ter 4 illustrate the degree to which writing is always shared and so-
cial, as do the kinds of writing displayed in the opening sections of
chapter 5. Clearly, this archaeology confirms Lunsford and Ede’s claim
while displaying “ranges of selves” that might be pondered in elabo-
rating not only evaluation but also the kinds of knowledge rendered
possible through such courses, a point explored in chapter 7’s discus-
sion of writers’ expertise. Integral to collaborative writing in today’s
classrooms are, of course, computers—the technological development
that has revolutionized writing and reading formations as no other
development since the printing press yet while remaining narrowly
conceptualized in much writing curricula.
134    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Computerized Composition and “Informating”

In her discussion of the shift in the organization of industrial life from
the earlier “automated age” inherited from the industrial revolution
to the “informated age,” Zuboff observes the danger of archaic orga-
nizational forms in this new age:

      Unless informating is taken up as a conscious strategy, rather than sim-
      ply allowed to unfold without any anticipation of its consequences, it is
      unlikely to yield up its full value. The centerpiece of such a strategy must
      be a redefinition of the system of authority that is expressed in and main-
      tained by the traditional industrial division of labor. (309)

Her reference to “value” resonates with earlier discussions of high-
value economies and the need to better prepare symbolic analysts, and
the workplaces they enter, for such work. The systems of authority to
which she refers locate authority in hierarchical position, rather than
in the knowledge produced through the exercise of one’s profession.
Clearly, the implication is once again for flattening hierarchies to best
exploit workers’ potentials.
    Other implications abound. As a stand-alone machine and with-
out adequate curricular goals and contexts, the computer merely speeds
writing and knowledge production processes, depriving writers of re-
thinking their writing as fundamentally as the computer is reshaping
writing. Stuart Selber’s “Beyond Skill Building: Challenges Facing
Technical Communication Teachers in the Computer Age,” grounded
in a survey of actual computerized composition courses on a number
of campuses, exposes the limits of computerized composition without
adequate contextualization—not just for technical communication
teachers but for all writing teachers. Selber lauds the efforts of educa-
tors who integrate “literacy and humanistic concerns” into the con-
ceptualization of computerized composition; such concerns are vital
to professional writers as they study writing, reconstruct its concept-
ualization in the informating age, and ponder its role not only in or-
ganizational authority but also in organizational authorship, explored
in chapter 7.
    Johndan Johnson-Eilola links studies such as those by Selber on
classroom instruction with current organization of workplace comput-
ing in “Relocating the Value of Work: Technical Communication in a
Post-Industrial Age.” Using Reich’s discussion of symbolic-analytical
                                REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   135


work as touchstone, he updates earlier approaches to substantiate the
“value added” by technical communicators, in the process sketching
lines of inquiry that might enhance our understanding of the writing
of workplace cultures in the computer age. He analyzes, for example,
recent trends in industry such as “reengineering” as in fact a newfound
focus on communication, a domain in which writers, writing scholars,
and writing instructors have been generating knowledge and hence
value for years. His analysis suggests probing further the kinds of
knowledge that writers always bring to a workplace context tacitly and
pondering the implications for rendering such knowledge explicit; as
we do this we should simultaneously explore and expose the ways in
which this knowledge is inextricably bound to other knowledge, other
aims, and other subjects.
     Johnson-Eilola extends his analysis of computer-mediated compo-
sition and its instruction in Nostalgic Angels: Rearticulating Hypertext
Writing to note various ways in which the advent of hypertext neces-
sitates inspecting the technological subjectivities engendered by it,
observing that “in order to construct hypertext as a socially empow-
ering technology, we have to expand our vision to the social, mapping
the world and living the map” (173). The mapping he suggests could
easily draw on discourses such as workplace archaeologies provide:
    In hypertext discourses, what escapes is often the social milieu in which
    the technology is developed, used, and remade. Critical theories and
    pedagogies of hypertext must begin mapping these uses, users, and dis-
    courses against each other—the endless task of cognitively mapping lo-
    cal to global that is only ever struggle, never resolution. (240)

    As we draw such maps, we can in the process reexamine some of
our catch-metaphors for writing. To the metaphorical characterizations
of writerly selves as “reverse prisms” and “channels” in solitary pro-
duction can be added those of “nodes” or “links” when writers’ work
takes place in networks, in systems of information and knowledge.
Consider Starla’s role of scanning major newspapers daily for work-
worthy information, or Albert’s role as “in charge of the public image
of the organization” on the World Wide Web. The position of node in
information flow is no small charge, given that information often func-
tions as capital in an organization’s value. As we design curricula that
prompt students to reflect upon these metaphors and their implications,
we would do well to include in our designs elements that would prompt
136    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


students to conceptualize such nodes and links as multidimensional,
to virtual forums that inform writers as a class of professional, for
example. Says Cynthia Selfe:
      For nondominant groups, e-mail is a particularly potent site for discur-
      sive exchange because it ameliorates some of the geographic barriers that
      hinder collective action, providing direct access to individuals and other
      groups who share dissatisfactions, concerns, and solutions. In this way,
      e-mail also serves as a possible site for individual agency, resistance, and
      collective action based on the rhetorical articulation of shared ideologi-
      cal positions. (278)

As we represent discursive work among ourselves and to our students
as inevitably bound to classes in formation, developing courses that
enable writers to build positions on and within such formations is in-
dispensable.

Pondering Discursive Shards and Imagining New Writing Vessels
The melding of computer technology and writing has shaped profes-
sional writers’ work in local cultures as fundamentally as did the re-
organization of those cultures along Taylorist lines early in the twen-
tieth century. As the discussions in part two and this chapter intimate,
moreover, computerized writing has enormous implications for the
shapes of discursive subjectivities to come. Psychological and socio-
logical subjectivities will be shaped by the ways in which entries into
computerized, webbed discourse will change with advances in tech-
nology. Political subjectivities will change as writers are able to forge
new alliances beyond the boundaries of workplace cultures, with writ-
ers in other cultures and with allies in the academy. Ideological
subjectivities will change as computerized writing enhances the ways
in which subjects can construct representations for themselves of their
conditions of work lives. Ultimately, the discursive scenes of workplace
writing could serve as invaluable empirical records of the constructions
of “self” and “other” that organizations and their discourses engen-
der and promote. Surely, such constructions will figure prominently
in the century ahead as we find ourselves compelled to explore genu-
inely the constructions of self and other that lie at the core of inequi-
table—even hostile—relations within the nation and beyond it. The
multidisciplinarity of discourse studies as a field makes it rich with po-
                                REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE ACADEMY   137


tential for such explorations, and composition’s focus on discursive
production, rather than discursive consumption, positions it as a prom-
ising part of such studies.
     As we ponder discursive shards from archaeologies such as this one
and as we attempt to imagine new writing vessels, we can perhaps rec-
tify the long-standing belief in English departments that composition
is somehow “contentless.” In the impoverished forums of English class-
rooms, writing does often appear a mere vehicle for expressing thoughts,
but in workplace writing, the “content” of composition is the work it
effects, the realities it mediates, and the subjectivities it shapes. The
more often we can represent discursive work in this light within the
academy, the more we can garner support from colleagues in other
disciplines and from agents in positions of academic stewardship and
public oversight. Composition made remarkable strides in represent-
ing (and revising) understandings of discourse production in the last
three decades of the twentieth century, and as technological advances
continue, the potential for composition studies to yield more knowl-
edge and more value for the academy and the workplace seems great.
     These same technological advances, however, can collude with
current-traditional epistemologies of composition as forwarded by
most English departments to reproduce an understanding of writing
as contentless, of the shaping of subjectivities through discursive work
as a by-product rather than a fascinating, vital focus. Writing in “Dis-
tant Voices: Teaching and Writing in a Culture of Technology,” Chris
M. Anson says,
    With the potential for the further automation of writing instruction
    through the use of telecommuting and other technology-supported shifts
    in instructional delivery, composition may be further subordinated to the
    interests of powerful subject-oriented disciplines where the conception
    of expertise creates rather different patterns of hiring and material sup-
    port. (275)

He is referring to the trend in scientifically managed academic envi-
ronments to reduce full-time faculty ranks through part-time employ-
ees capable of serving the “powerful subject-oriented disciplines.” Of
course, these disciplines lie elsewhere than English at present, but dis-
course studies could very well rise in prominence with the growing
recognition that “the subject” is a subject vital not only in the ideo-
logical but also the economic and political spheres.
138   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


    As we continue to demonstrate how vital this subject is, and can
be, we will vest our students and our collaborating professional writ-
ers with an expertise on a par with those from other disciplines. To do
so, we will have to re-present writing in workplace contexts, too, the
topic of the next chapter.
7   REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN
    THE WORKPLACE

    The basic triad of elements (writer, audience, text) that we have
    distilled from classical theory is not sufficient to explain or to
    model the practice of rhetoric in today’s economic world.
                            —Mary Beth Debs, “Corporate Authority”

    If you have a master’s in English, you should be an expert.
                                             —Bernie, in class, 2/2/93




                                                                         139
140   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS




Bernie’s comment, voiced in the second class meeting of the first of-
fering of the course Cultures of Professional Writing, reflected his cen-
tral aim in returning to graduate school: to develop expertise on a par
with the legal writers whom he regularly edited in his workplace. His
progress reports, research, and comments in class occasionally refer-
enced the second-class status that he lived in professionally and which
he found unfulfilling. Over the years, such concerns about status have
been echoed by the large majority of course participants, and many of
them have addressed this phenomenon directly in their research, as
discussed in chapter 4. Whether living workplace lives as “function-
aries,” “ghosts,” or “support staff,” professional writers experience
their status as second-class to “subject matter experts” and other col-
leagues from various professional classes. And whether or not one
empathizes with their affective response to this condition, as writing
scholars and as writers who know firsthand the power of writing, we
should be prompted to probe the (mis-)representations underpinning
such status.
     Composition epistemology as conveyed through teaching practices
that reduce the locus of writing expertise primarily to formal qualities
surely has much to do with the misunderstandings of writing beyond
the walls of the academy. If we imagine the curriculum vitae of pro-
fessionals from all classes in any given workplace, their formal writ-
ing instruction, in perhaps 95 percent of the cases, holds one element
in common: Composition 101. And as earlier discussions argue, the
representation of writing conveyed through most generic composition
courses over the years has remained essentially formalist, current-tra-
ditional, and modernist. Recent college graduates may have benefited
from writing intensive courses in various disciplines or writing across
the curriculum (WAC) courses, but the standard for measuring the
epistemology of writing remains composition. Recent innovations in
composition instruction that make use of draft and revision, peer re-
sponse, “freewriting,” and the like may have enhanced professionals’
understanding of writing processes yet done little to prompt under-
                             REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   141


standings of writing as a unique form of meaning production and of
discursive engagement as shaping realities rather than merely reflect-
ing them.
    Moreover, other professionals who have benefitted from writing
instruction under the process paradigm and in content areas will have
used writing to build knowledge in content areas with immediate ap-
plications in organizational contexts. The MBA looms as the most
unequivocal example; a survey of course topics and applications as-
sociated with them in other disciplines would certainly yield similar
examples. The professional writers in this archaeology, who hold de-
grees almost exclusively in English, bring no similar “content area”
knowledge to workplace cultures. (Other archaeologies might reveal
degrees in areas such as communications, for example, in which case
the melding of communications knowledge with writing knowledge
produces a unique kind of “content,” but here again, popular concep-
tions of “communication” as messages following unilinear paths from
senders to receivers represents communications specialists’ expertise,
also, as essentially formal.) Professionals with degrees in business, gov-
ernment, engineering, organizational psychology, and the like enter the
work force with a knowledge of some subject area linked closely with
an organization’s products or the management of its production. Be-
cause these employees have expertise that allows them to originate the
products of their organization or to situate these products historically
and in the marketplace (as in the case of legal services, say), their sta-
tus hovers above that of writers, who handle “only” the discourse sur-
rounding these products.
    As writing teachers, we might be moved to re-present discursive
work to the workplace by the effects on writer psychology bound up
in representations of writers’ work as purely formal: withdrawal of
engagement, low morale, frustration, resignation, and insecurity (see
chapter 5). Or as workplace managers, we might be moved to seek a
new re-presentation in the interest of reshaping dynamics between the
individual and the organization (see chapter 4) and hence potentially
enhancing the value that will be generated in the workplace. Or as
writing scholars and professional writers, we might be moved to re-
present discursive work to the workplace by sheer dismay at the pov-
erty of current models as compared with the richness of writerly ex-
perience. Whatever the motivations, we can begin by revisiting theories
of authorship, in the hopes that a cultural construct so broadly con-
structed from multiple roots can serve as intellectual meeting place
142   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


for people reapproaching writing in twenty-first-century organiza-
tional contexts.

Representing Authorship
In chapter 2 I presented a brief account of the ways in which the “au-
thor function,” as Foucault would term it, has worked culturally to
establish domains of discursive exclusivity, locating writing from stu-
dents and workplaces in the lower realms. Academic debates about
“authorship” as a concept reifying the transcendent ego have been
filtered to a broader public through media focus on such catch-phrases
as Barthes’s now famous “death of the author” (Image, Music, Text).
Like Nietzsche’s murder of god, Barthes’s homicide has provoked
strong responses, variously motivated, no doubt, yet galvanized cer-
tainly by the apparent evacuation of individual will from discursive
acts. To popular representations of scholarly inquiry gone awry, one
might counter with Richard Freed’s observation: “the so-called death
of the author, however, doesn’t mean his demise, only that the scribe
is always already circumscribed” (212). Mass representations of the
“author” resist an equation with “scribe,” of course, yet even this se-
mantic sticking point might be argued through historical investigations
that locate scribes as part of a larger authoring process (Woodmansee);
in the hermeneutical tradition, moreover, the most hegemonic texts
were products not of original individual writing but of transcription
of the divine word.
     Yet the conditions of circumscription in authorship, as popularly
conceptualized, have remained largely physical rather than ideologi-
cal. Just as Composition 101 serves as a cultural reference point for
most professionals reflecting on the nature of writing and composing,
so have literature courses focusing on the works of fiction or poetry,
published under the names of individuals, shaped most people’s no-
tions of authorship. In addition to scholastic experiences, popular
framings of authorship via best-seller lists, book signings, and the like
contribute to an understanding of the author as the solitary, originat-
ing, published writer discussed in chapter 2. By such measures, pro-
fessional writers are never implicated in authorship, the realities of their
discursive work reflecting precisely the antithesis, as represented in
Sharon Crowley’s ironic comment cited earlier: “there’s writing, which
is the simple ordering and recording of thoughts or information and
which can be done as easily by a secretary or a committee or a ma-
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   143


chine or a technical writer” (“writing” 97). The title of “secretary”
signals not only a gendered position but also a functionary one, two
traits that distinguish professional writing as often practiced. That
professional writers often compose collaboratively (even if not by
“committee”) and allocate part of the writing process to machines (by
virtue of having mastered software that their bureaucratic masters
haven’t mastered) additionally places them outside the realm of au-
thorship as popularly construed.
     Crowley refers as well to “technical writers” in parodying our
broad cultural constructions, evoking images of techno-functionaries
charged with the apparently transparent task of documenting other
people’s realities. And as unlikely to most people as this particular realm
of professional writing might seem in enlarging notions of authorship,
some of the most provocative work on linking authorship theory with
authorship practice has come from this realm. By way of example, if
the image of a near automaton suggested by Crowley seems too hyper-
bolic, Jennifer Slack, David Miller, and Jeffrey Doak render the hyper-
bolic real: “We want robots!” stated an industry recruiter for techni-
cal communicators on their campus (31). The authors demonstrate
convincingly how technical writers are never functioning as near ma-
chines in an uncircumscribed space, whether or not their coworkers,
or even the writers themselves, acknowledge it. Reviewing communi-
cations models in order to demonstrate the shortcomings of the “trans-
mission” model, the authors draw upon articulation theory to point
out that communication always “articulates” all subjects implicated
in the process to power and knowledge, albeit in varying ways depend-
ing upon institutional location, local practices, and so on. Slack, Doak,
and Miller designate all technical writers authors by linking this theory
with a Foucauldian theory of authorship focusing not on flesh-and-
blood subjects but on their discursive counterparts in circuits of dis-
course production:

    Whether they desire it or not, technical communicators are seen as vari-
    ously adding, deleting, changing, and selecting meaning. Again, whether
    they desire it or not, they are always implicated in relations of power.
    Their work is at least complicit in the production, reproduction, or sub-
    version of relations of power. This is necessarily the case, even when the
    acceptance of the transmission or translation model may occlude the
    nature of the work they do. Technical communicators are authors, even
    when they comply with the rules of discourse that deny them that recog-
    nition. (31)
144   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


     My own experience as a technical writer illustrates some gains for
organizational writers, their readers, and organizations when we prob-
lematize the authorship of instrumental discourse. When I worked as
a technical writer in the railroad industry, I was charged with revising
operating rules (in collaboration with a committee of fifteen content
experts) to render them readable for employees of high school educa-
tion or less. That job not only sent me to readability research to dis-
cover the reductive, simplistic, purely formal principles underpinning
readability formulae, it also enabled me to see how elements such as
document design could radically change reception of text. (McKenzie’s
study of the redesign of plays in the eighteenth century as “forms ef-
fecting meaning” [Chartier] comes once again to mind.) As I was be-
ginning my foray into narratological theory at the time, the experience
also enabled me to read the operating rules as a text presenting real
readers with an implied reader, with whom they would or would not
identify and hence engage with the text. In conjunction with this im-
plied reader, of course, was an implied author for the text, whose image
I shaped as I conducted my research and as we completed our collabo-
rative revision, establishing in the process new textual formulations
of users’ places and purviews in the relations of power at work in this
organization.
     It is perhaps precisely because technical writing has for so long been
understood as the unproblematic representation of some preexisting
reality, in which the writer’s task is to perfectly mirror that reality in
discourse, that the field has responded to social constructionist tenets
that dispel the mirror metaphor with provocative re-presentations of
authorship such as those offered by Slack, Miller, and Doak. One of
the germinal theoretical pieces in the field is Carolyn Miller’s “What’s
Practical about Technical Writing?” in which she observes the Greek
understanding of rhetoric as an art (or techne), which reverberates with
researchers’ representations of themselves as writers in chapter 2. In
discussing practical rhetoric, Miller provides historical analysis, ob-
serving two associations attributed to the “practical” deriving from
classical Greek usage: a “high” sense which “derives from the Aristo-
telian concept of praxis and underlies modern philosophical pragma-
tism, [and which] concerns human conduct in those activities that main-
tain the life of the community” (15) and a “low” sense having to do
more with accomplishing mundane activities of “the world of work”
(15), by people unconcerned with theory. Noting the system of slavery
                             REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   145


in place in the culture that gave birth to such distinctions (it was the
slaves who performed most of the mundane activities while free male
citizens partook in activities concerning the life of the community), Mil-
ler wonders rhetorically if “we might question whether this associa-
tion should prevail” (15).
     Of course, the association does prevail, and one of the enduring
debates in technical writing circles has centered on the motivations of
technical writing curricula: the academy’s designs or the workplace’s
needs. Proponents of the latter have sought high praxis by bringing
“theory” into their classrooms in forms as apparently neutral as docu-
ment design theory, for example. Proponents of the former have leaned
towards the social constructionist theories such as those invoked by
Slack, Miller, and Doak and which seem eminently more promising
for reshaping broader cultural perceptions of authorship. Until we can
re-present the seemingly “low” practical dimensions of authorship as
always implicated in “high” practices imbricated in broad, deep, vital
cultural issues, a slavery of another form will endure—the slavery of
workers to ideologies that misrepresent their work, manifested not
coincidentally through the ongoing formation of a professional class
consisting mostly of women (see chapter 2).
     This archaeology not only argues for professional writing curricula
that are motivated by both the academy and the workplace, it proposes
some novel forms in chapters 6 and 8. Integral to these forms, as might
be expected, are professional writers as emissaries, border workers who
move between both cultures to inform each. Here the social force of
“teacher” that frequently enters discourse through the writing self,
documented in chapter 2 yet rarely mentioned as part of writers’ roles
in organizations in chapter 4, can prove extremely valuable: part of
our professional writing curricula should focus on the roles of profes-
sional writers in teaching discourse theory to the workplace and in
teaching workplace cultures to the academy. Such a positioning of
“student” subjectivity seems vital to me, as I have argued in “Teach-
ing Technical Authorship.” At the same time, professional bodies such
as the Society for Technical Communication (the largest professional
organization for professional writers in the country) will have to de-
fine, promote, and lobby for the understanding of the discursive work
of the workplace as constitutive of realities rather than reflective of
them, as I have argued in “Toward Technical Authorship.” Particu-
larly in an age in which electronic updating of the forms of authorship
146   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


seems to progress geometrically (and thus demands so much effort
merely to keep abreast of these forms), such positioning will prove
difficult. Yet if we are to re-present discursive work in the workplace
in ways commensurate with our scholarly understandings of the work-
ings of discourse and our writerly sensibilities while embroiled in dis-
cursive work, such a project seems essential. To support it I extend these
observations on authorship and return to the narratological frame pre-
sented in chapter 1 to sketch a model that does justice to the scope of
professional writing and which might enable us all to re-present au-
thorship to audiences beyond the walls of the academy.


Representing the Domain of Professional Authorship

The narratological model depicted in chapter 1 and used throughout
this archaeological research reflects popular understandings of author-
ship as described above, which is to say solo textual production, pri-
marily in the realm of fiction or poetry, disseminated in book form to
a largely anonymous audience. Although the model aids inquiry into
nonfiction authorship through its delineation of textual and extratex-
tual authors, it proves inadequate for apprehending the complexities
of workplace authorship. If we contemplate workplace authorship
against chapter 4’s discussion of document processing, subcultural
dynamics, and cultural stabilization and change, for example, the sec-
tion “Dynamics of Collective Procedures and Writing” underscores the
frequency with which multiple “authors” contribute to documents
which may be published anonymously or under the name of an orga-
nizational player who in fact wrote none of the content. More and more
often, the audience for a text in the workplace has actually provided
input into the authoring process: usability and readability testing in
technical writing stand as the most striking example of this phenom-
enon, and a glance at the lists of organizational products and kinds of
writing in chapter 5 reveals other ways in which audiences play a role
in authoring. In his “Intertextuality and the Writing Process,” Jack
Selzer asks “Cannot the audience be seen as author, too?” (177), and
the archaeological work of researchers in this book documents several
ways in which audiences are authors. One of the most striking ex-
amples, and without doubt a presaging one, is that of Gary’s study of
Web site authorship, which includes regular updates of electronic “tex-
tual” representations as a direct function of users’ responses to the
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   147


current form. The webmaster’s guiding principles in “authoring” are
thus responses from the audience.
     The ways in which the audience becomes part of the authoring
process and the positions that audiences are afforded in the process
are many and polemical. If the audience is positioned merely as con-
sumer, the writer’s role is reduced to “low practice”: adjusting appeals
for maximum consumption. Yet such is rarely the case, given that pro-
fessional writers are always balancing audience response with organi-
zational concerns and priorities, as reflected by the list of skills and by
the dynamics of collective procedures and writing discussed in chap-
ter 4. This multivalent positioning of professional writers has led Sul-
livan and Porter to characterize them as “audience advocates,” apply-
ing the metaphors of “arbitrator” or “negotiator” to elaborate this
positioning (414). Their metaphors dovetail with those proposed by
Slack, Miller, and Doak, who speak of technical authors as “advocates
for their constituencies: their employers, clients, and audiences” (33n).
     These metaphors for professional writers’ workplace identities
have wide-ranging implications, which go beyond the pragmatics of
authoring organizational texts to the changing epistemologies of com-
position. Speaking of the “disappearing boundaries” between audience
and authorship, Louise Wetherbee Phelps puts it this way:
    The difficulties [in accounting comprehensively for social dimensions of
    writing] foreshadow the imminent replacement of dialogic interaction (an
    exclusive, cooperative relation between writer and reader mediated by
    text) with a more fully contextualized, polyphonic, contentious model
    of transactionality that encompasses multiple participants and voices
    along with situation, setting, institutions, and language itself—and finds
    it hard to maintain firm boundaries between self and other. (156)

In referring to a model of “transactionality” Phelps evokes the work
of WAC researchers James Britton and others on “expressive” vs.
“transactional” writing, grounded in the Prague Linguistics Circle’s
model of communication that posits one sender and one receiver for
any act of communication. The model is unidirectional, unabashedly
modernist in its representation of “communication,” and remarkably
similar to Chatman’s narratological model presented in chapter 1.
Against the archaeological findings in this book and the theoretical
discussions above, I have revised Chatman’s model and named it for
the specific brand of discursive work that grounds this archaeology:
the domain of professional authorship. (See figure 3.)
148   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


                               Workplace Document
   Real          Implied                             Implied        Real
  AuthorS   ▼    AuthorS → (Narrator) → (Narratee) → ReaderS   ▼   ReaderS
      ▼
                               Organizational Culture

                                  Broader Cultures

Fig. 3. The Domain of Professional Authorship


     To approximate the complexity of professional authorship, this
model depicts many real authors for any one “text,” which is rendered
here with wavy boundaries to signal that more and more often, texts
are electronic, less fixed, and frequently “under construction,” to bor-
row from popular Web site jargon. Many real readers figure in this
model, too, some of whom contribute to authorship through their feed-
back, some of whom do not. The implied author and implied reader
of this model are multivalent, since the texts of professional author-
ship are frequently consulted selectively rather than read in their en-
tirety, unlike the implied author and reader of the earlier narratological
model which presumes linear and complete readings. As in the earlier
model, the implied author is understood as the “implicit image of an
author in the text, taken to be standing behind the scenes and to be
responsible for its design and for the values and cultural norms it ad-
heres to,” to recall Prince’s definition in chapter 1 (Dictionary 42). The
professional writer, in this model, is both maker and monitor of the
implied author.
     In addition to providing a “more fully contextualized, polyphonic,
contentious model of transactionality” as per Phelps’s requirements,
this model restores to workplace writers their rightful place in author-
ship, wrested from them through composition epistemology spawned
at the turn of the twentieth century by the needs of high-volume mac-
roeconomic production and postsecondary curricular design that sun-
dered writing selves from their writing. For as makers and monitors of
the implied author of a document, professional writers should be vested
with rights and responsibilities regarding the values and cultural norms
the document adheres to. Such a position in the domain of professional
authorship has wide-ranging implications for writers’ expertise—as
they exercise it on the job, as we shape it with them through collabo-
rative research, and as they represent it to colleagues in the workplace.
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   149


Representing Writers’ Expertise
In the past ten years, the field of rhetoric has produced compelling
arguments for renewed focus on the ethics of composing. At the 1997
Conference on College Composition and Communication, for example,
some twenty sessions were devoted explicitly to issues of ethics in com-
posing. Recent textbooks in technical writing such as Lay et al.’s Tech-
nical Communication emphasize the importance of a technical docu-
ment’s ethos, a topic rarely broached in earlier textbooks in this field.
Articles in scholarly journals abound, exploring the ethics of compos-
ing either directly or tangentially as part of other discussions.
     Among these articles is James E. Porter’s “Developing a Postmod-
ern Ethics of Rhetoric and Composition.” Like Mary Beth Debs, whose
chapter epigraph notes the inadequacy of the rhetorical triangle inher-
ited from classical times, Porter recognizes the inadequacy of an eth-
ics presuming universal precepts that theoretically precede discursive
events. Porter reviews Aristotelian epistemology to note that “for Aris-
totle, arts of production (like poetry and rhetoric) were distinct from
the practical arts (like ethics and politics)” (209). He also notes that
this view has remained the “dominant” view within rhetorical stud-
ies, which helps account for the recent focus in composition theory and
practice. Composition, granted legitimation through alliance with rhet-
oric, has found itself claiming terrain that classical rhetoric does not
bestow. That much composition instruction as practiced in this coun-
try in this century likewise ignores the effects of composing has retarded
the emergence of ethos as a valid and vital focus for compositionists.
     Yet the scholarship on the ethos of composing makes overwhelm-
ingly compelling arguments for locating this topic at the center of
composition’s agenda—in both classroom instruction and in research.
Steven Katz, for example, has conducted research on technical memos
composed during the Third Reich that describe the design of vans to
transport people to their deaths in terms of the “number of pieces
loaded” (255). Katz’s argument is that the very genre of technical doc-
umentation offers an ethos that legitimates such wording, since in some
versions of technical discourse the writers not only have no say in con-
tent, they actively work to objectify subjects and to occlude agency—
in compliance with discourse conventions. Katz concludes his analy-
sis by fleshing out questions for compositionists:
    The question for us is: do we, as teachers and writers and scholars, con-
    tribute to this ethos by our writing theory, pedagogy, and practices when
150    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS

      we consider techniques of document design, audience adaptation, argu-
      mentation, and style without also considering ethics? (271)

     Yet considering ethics as part of composing, in the double bind
created by classical rhetorical theory and current-traditional compo-
sition epistemology is no easy task, as James Porter makes clear in his
essay cited above. His “postmodern ethics” includes an “ethical com-
posing process” that discards classical notions of universal values pre-
ceding composition and which positions the composing event among
pulls from the individual, a discipline/field, the community, and tradi-
tion/culture. Porter notes that such a composing process “necessarily
involves the ways that knowledge, power, and ethics intersect” (222).
     Such a conceptualization of composing processes makes eminent
sense against the grounding of this archaeology, since professional writ-
ers’ purview, within the domain of professional authorship, includes
shaping and monitoring a document’s implied author, taken here to be
roughly equivalent to a document’s ethos. Though one might argue that
these two concepts differ somewhat in their roots, to the degree that
they designate the values conveyed by a document they are equivalent.
An added advantage of speaking in terms of implied authorship is that
it supports the conceptual reframing of authorship, in the academy and
in the workplace, to extend it to instrumental discourse, to include mul-
tiple contributors, and to take into account the effects of discourse as
they reverberate within and beyond local cultures. To speak in terms
of implied authorship in a domain of professional authorship is to take
into account the pulls on writers in ethical composing processes noted
by Porter. Such a theoretical framing also prompts ideas for reconcep-
tualizing professional writers’ expertise, which I will sketch with re-
spect to the model above.

Expertise as Shaper and Monitor of Implied Authors

Katz’s example of an implied author that seems unthinkable yet is in
fact made possible by conventions at work in a particular kind of dis-
course may seem to be an extreme example, yet when the discursive
shards turned up by researchers in this archaeology are considered for
the possible unities they might form, examples nearly as extreme as
Katz’s take form. Scanning the kinds of writing documented by re-
searchers in chapter 5’s first section, one can imagine memos and cor-
respondence composed by professional writers who have gleaned valu-
able information about the topic at hand through writing about it yet
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   151


whose purview in voicing this information is restricted. That is, their
writing processes might have produced knowledge deemed extraneous
to the immediate task by supervisors yet potentially significant in the
long run, or in a slightly different application, or with a slightly differ-
ent audience, and so forth. Composing an implied author that ignores
these possibilities is tantamount to fostering a culture that sanctions
ignorance, yet as discursive work is currently represented in most work-
places, most decisions about implied authors—about the cultural norms
and values conveyed through writing—are beyond writers’ rights.
     Katz’s research is ultimately not about individual agency so much
as the ways in which agency is prefigured and constricted by discur-
sive structures; a writer’s need to develop acuity in perceiving such pre-
figuring and constricting should go without saying. Equally important
is the need to develop acuity in perceiving convergences between dis-
cursive structures and organizational structures and to glean ways in
which discursive practices and organizational practices take shape among
these structures. By developing such acuities, writers can monitor the
congruences among the values and norms that the local culture seeks
to foster and the values and norms that result from authoring pro-
cesses—the better to inform other culture members and the better to
exploit writerly talents to their fullest in the interests of the organiza-
tion and its members.
     Developing such expertise clearly requires some experience and
instruction in organizational analysis, as suggested in chapter 6. It also
hinges upon the ongoing representation of writing in the workplace
as an engagement in the production of meaning rather than merely its
transmission and the work of writers as already imbricated in cultural
production and reproduction. Such representations are not just claims
in the interest of a professional class in formation, they are indicators
of ways in which reconfiguring writers’ expertise as discursive work
can benefit the local culture. As writers develop acuity in discourse anal-
ysis along the lines sketched here, their daily encounters with discourses
of the workplace will take on a greater theoretical dimension, leading
some, for example, to interpret discursive bits as seemingly banal as
e-mail as valuable indicators of an organization’s climate, as Challie did
in her research for the Cultures of Professional Writing course.
     Shaping implied authors will entail theoretical inquiry into any
discourse forms that emerge in given cultures, as discourse specialists
compose among these forms. One can imagine the complexity of such
work against the backdrop of chapter 5’s discussion: multiple discourses
152   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


will require inquiry through fieldwork and perhaps archival work, to
glean origins and groundings of such discourses and to identify suit-
able implied authors; underlying discourses will require evasive tac-
tics at worst (by writers who find themselves in discursive scenes that
target them as members of a race, gender, etc.) and enhanced complex-
ity of composing processes at best as writers come to appropriate grips
with these discourses.
     Monitoring implied authors will ultimately mean expanding loops
of information flow, so that discourse specialists can provide contribu-
tors with feedback and status reports, as an organization’s documents
become artifacts for analysis and reflection upon discursive instanti-
ation of culture by all interested culture members. Such reconfiguring
of information flow runs antithetical to rigid hierarchical workplace
cultures, of course, but such structures are already archaic in high-value
economies, even if they prevail for the moment. As networks of com-
posing become increasingly complex through virtual collaboration, the
information flows between centers of organizations and their periph-
eries will change as a matter of fact; anticipating such changes and
configuring them as part of conscious discursive work can only serve
both writers and the organization.
     For such expertise to be acknowledged and become actualized, sig-
nificant re-presentations of the nature of writing and discourse work
will have to take place. Here the frequent dovetailing between writers’
experiences as writers and as teachers proves serendipitous, allowing
us to imagine writers instructing coworkers in current discourse theory
much as writers in the past have instructed coworkers on formal issues
in prose. Those professional writers and aspiring writers who hold no
formal experience as teachers nor anticipate any should be able to draw
upon subject positions as teachers and learners that they frequently
occupy discursively if not organizationally, the better to convey to col-
leagues the complexity of work long believed to be relatively superfi-
cial because of inadequate representations.
     The frequent forays into the realm of technical writing that so many
professional writers make can aid them, too, as they ponder implied
authors amid the discourses of their workplaces and the enactment of
those discourses as technology configures and reconfigures it. Indeed,
Carolyn Miller speaks of a need to elaborate a “rhetoric from tech-
nology”: “the ways in which values and thought patterns developed
by technological work extend to and pervade other cultural arenas”
(“Learning from History” 307). Professional writers will need such a
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   153


rhetoric, and self-conscious employment of technology while compos-
ing the implied authors that convey local cultural values could turn
up shards to be used in elaborating it.

Expertise as Coordinator of Real Authors Articulated to Implied Authors

In the domain of professional authorship, most writing is collabora-
tive, uniting several contributors, often from diverse backgrounds and
ways of knowing, to produce the “text” and its implied author. The
dynamics of collective procedures and writing as depicted in chapter
4 limn the complexity of such a task: document processes are inevita-
bly many and varied, inflecting prose forms through disciplinary re-
view, subject to organizational players’ ad hoc tactics, and at times
flowing counter to vital information flows. Subcultural dynamics take
form depending upon divisional allegiances, varying approaches to
knowledge and its production, and struggles to shape and resist insti-
tutional constructions of subjectivity; cultures change and restabilize,
requiring socialization of workers, new learning, and inevitably intro-
ducing new players. Among such cultural dynamics, professional writ-
ers must coordinate efforts.
     Local cultural dynamics, for writers and for professionals from
other classes, have been rendered even more complex in recent years
through the innovations in technology and the work effected through
it. The potential for technological developments in the areas of hard-
ware and software at times appears boundless, and the effects on real
authors as they use this technology often go unnoticed, as noted by
Johnson-Eilola in his discussion of hypertext:

    The machine seems to anticipate the user’s needs, responding like a
    shadow to every wish and movement. The machine is never completely
    absent, but it becomes increasingly difficult—pointless, it seems—to re-
    flect on the operations of the machine, like thinking about breathing.
    Functional hypertexts are defined, socially and politically, in this poli-
    tics of amnesia. (Nostalgic Angels 50)

That only one researcher in this volume focused primarily on the in-
fluence of technology on the practice of professional writing (Albert)
confirms perhaps the degree to which computer-mediated authorship
has become as second nature as breathing. Yet such internalization can
indeed engender a politics of amnesia, which underscores the need for
writers and scholars to be developing a rhetoric from technology to
154   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


raise technology’s subtle shaping of subjectivity to the conscious level
and to aid practicing writers in coordinating cultural authorship as
technology progresses.
     Clearly, such coordination will require the kinds of teaching about
discourse theory and effects as outlined above as well as ongoing in-
quiry into discursive production. This coordination will also entail oc-
cupying organizational subject positions such as “diplomat” (Jeff), as
writers interact with various real authors. As noted in the previous
chapter’s discussion of writing curricula, writers are usually ill-prepared
for such roles, having learned writing most often in singular author-
ship modes. Clearly, this lacuna must be rectified within the academy;
at the same time, we can begin representing plural authorship of sin-
gular texts more adequately in the workplace.
     One way to do so is to extend Susan Kleimann’s work on work-
place cultures and review, using her notion of “contributory expertise”
(68) as a leverage point. Kleimann proposes this term based on obser-
vation of hierarchical and collaborative review processes at the Gen-
eral Accounting Office. Her subjects were not professional writers but
rather professionals from other classes who composed reports through
elaborate review, yet her notion of each contributor bringing to the
composition special knowledge about technical aspects, legalities,
front-office aims, and audience has great import for enhancing our
knowledge of writers’ contributory expertise. Once we conceptualize
writing as work that not only reflects but constructs realities, that draws
upon diverse discursive practices and traditions in the inscription of
local cultures and the construction of implied authors whose norms
and values could have wide repercussions, and that assumes discourse
as an apparatus for the production of meaning, the representation of
writers’ contributory expertise in coordinating real authorship looms
a vast undertaking that will require extensive and ongoing research.
     The work of several researchers in this text suggests self-documen-
tation as one way to track writers’ contributory expertise, with Gwen’s
perhaps the most compelling. In an attempt to explore such self-docu-
mentation, I designed an MA course entitled “Composing Collab-
oratively for Publication,” in which course participants self-selected
groups within which to compose an article for publication in a forum
of their choice while keeping detailed journals of their contributions
both individually and collectively in moving the project along. Read-
ing these journals and comparing them with my own class observa-
tions and selected audiotapes of collaborative composing sessions
                            REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   155


yielded a number of categories of expertise that writers employ tacitly
quite often yet which go unnoticed in workplace cultures precisely
because they are tacit and often rapidly deployed. For example, in
addition to tapping expertise in textual composition most frequently
associated with writers, writers collaborating with other contributors
often tapped expertise in actively shaping and reshaping review pro-
cedures and dynamics as they proceeded, deferring consensus (see
Burnett) on key issues when appropriate and adjusting composing
appropriately. They would tap attitudes, beliefs, and emotions to glean
“insight” (see Morgan and Murray), and they would use oral discourse
in a variety of ways to structure and support composition (Henry “Doc-
umenting Contributory Expertise”). Writers on the job no doubt de-
ploy many different kinds of expertise of this nature, in ways that vary
from culture to culture and in ways that cut across cultures. If we can
represent this expertise more fully in its complexity, we can display to
workplace colleagues the work that is entailed by coordinating real au-
thors’ contributions to a singular text and its implied author.
     If writers are represented in the workplace as employing their ex-
pertise not only in document processing but also in cultural process-
ing, they will be positioned to tap the research and theory on compos-
ing that has burgeoned in the last two decades to enhance these cultural
processes. Writing processes generally associated with individual cog-
nitive processes of composing such as planning or brainstorming, when
transposed to collective authorship, can well yield novel networks and
review among various contributors, enhancing their contributions. Fi-
nally, whether motivated by the contributions of real authors who are
also simultaneously intended users of organizationally authored prod-
ucts or by their responsibilities to cultures beyond their organization
gleaned through monitoring implied authorship in organizational
documents, professional writers working in the domain of professional
authorship will want to develop and represent their expertise as me-
diators between a given local workplace culture and larger cultures in
which any work has its effects. Some ideas concerning such expertise
are presented below.

Expertise as an Intermediary Between Organizational Cultures and
Larger Cultures

In archaic organizational structures inherited from a previous economic
age, most information flow of any import beyond organizational bor-
156    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


ders is handled by professionals from classes such as management. In
the informated age of electronic networks, such flow is nearly impos-
sible—and highly counterproductive—since it fails to tap the skills of
workers such as writers who can interpret and act upon information
in novel ways. Concerning information coming into the organization,
consider Starla’s job of combing major newspapers each morning for
news pertinent to her division and her organization. As a writer who
also collaborates in shaping information that will travel from her or-
ganization through various media to larger cultures and who draws
upon ways of knowing and learning specific to writers during such
discursive work, she interprets this information in unique ways. Her
expertise includes reading as a writer, and thus imagining discursively
constructed realities that might take footing in what she reads. This
expertise has direct connections with “reading formations” discussed
as part of writing curricula in chapter 6, and with ideology, since ideo-
logical discourses “work more through selective attention than through
outright suppression” (Rosaldo 87). As discourse workers interpret and
act upon information as it moves between workplace and larger cul-
tures, the representations that they make to themselves of their rela-
tionships to their conditions of existence are always at work, and it be-
hooves us all, as writers and researchers, to probe interplays between
these representations and such intermediation.
    Concerning the effects of organizational authorship on larger cul-
tures and professional writers’ roles in these effects, Mary Beth Debs
offers one scenario:

      In writing, for example, about new products or policy decisions, the writer
      is acting as a spokesperson for the organization in transcribing what is,
      in effect, a preexisting reality (the product or policy developed by the or-
      ganization): It is the company’s message and to a large extent the organ-
      ization’s vision or knowledge that the writer is sending. (166)

In characterizing a writer’s work as “transcribing . . . a preexisting
reality,” Debs sketches a scenario of cultural inscription, of mediation
between the organizational and the discursive effected by writers. Her
selection of “products” as example might prompt us to muse upon the
organizational products and kinds of writing discussed in chapter 5.
Though products such as editorial pages and recruitment brochures
might seem relatively innocuous, inquiries into the ways in which such
products represent internal realities and position external audiences
with respect to these realities by course researchers Jen and Hart, re-
                             REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   157


spectively, reveal the construction of a variety of relations between
organizational cultures and the larger cultures in which they are lo-
cated. In the case of a job announcement newsletter, audiences are
positioned as protégés of the organization; in the recruitment bro-
chures, as young scholars enamored with tradition yet desiring change.
As intermediary agents between organizations and audiences, writers
shape these relations and monitor them to ensure their success—which
in turn guarantees the solvency of the organization. And if we take
relationality as a generative topic in studies of cultural construction and
reproduction, we can ask ourselves how the relations that get shaped
through this mediation among cultures might become in turn foci for
inquiry in the ideological plane: how do the subject positions offered
to audiences through an organization’s discursive representations re-
verberate through larger cultures? What conditions of existence do they
imply and where do these conditions fit in systems of value within or-
ganizations and beyond them?
    In the discursive shards of chapter 5 alone, dozens and dozens of
representations, attendant positions, and relations among them are
suggested; other archaeologies would produce hundreds more. In the
domain of professional authorship, the relations thus established be-
come topics for critique in the ongoing progress of workplace cultures
and critical topics for culture members striving to maintain the solvency
of the organization. In this sense, the roles of “advocate” and “me-
diator” suggested by scholars in professional writing seem vital, since
these roles focus explicitly on the circuits of discursive output and feed-
back and the knowledge that can be constructed in these circuits. These
roles should prompt writers to nurture expertise in demographic in-
terpretation as it can feed such knowledge, to draw on circuits partic-
ular to, say, government writing that position the public as primary
audience reached through complex mediation, and to envision com-
posing for multiple and serial audiences as constructions of self and
other—to recall earlier comments by ethnographic theorist James Clif-
ford and composition theorist Louise Phelps.
    Such constructions of knowledge in the domain of professional
authorship will dovetail with knowledge of oneself as a member of a
professional class in formation as discussed in chapter 6 and with self-
knowledge as a writer whose subjectivity is an in-process construction
amid the discursive structures and practices of given workplace cul-
tures. To enhance this knowledge, writers, as “nodes” and “links”
between organizational cultures and larger cultures, will want to de-
158   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


velop expertise in participating in on-line forums composed of other
writers in other cultures, the better to frame reflections on discursive
selves and others (see Jillian in the appendixes; Selfe and Selfe). In
representing this facet of writers’ expertise in the workplace, writers
and scholars collaborating with them will probably want to point out
that discursive constructions of self and other are not only ethical con-
siderations but considerations in the generation of a culture’s value.

Representing Writing’s Interests
In an individual writing conference with George, he told me of peren-
nial writing classes offered in the military headquarters organization
where he worked. In these classes, expert instructors from outside the
organization would review principles of style and usage and run their
charges through exercises designed to reduce nominalizations, passive
voice, and the like. The classes were fine as refreshers, George claimed,
but nearly all of the writers with whom he collaborated had long since
mastered such fundamentals and rarely wrote in the passive voice or
converted action to stasis in their prose. The reports to which they
contributed, on the other hand, were riddled with such constructions,
and therein lay the rub: problems in style were the result of cultural
processes that included regular obfuscation of agency and disciplin-
ing of inferiors by superiors through discursive intervention that ef-
faced their “voices.” (For a fuller discussion, see Henry and “George.”)
Yet because “writing” in this culture was represented widely as an
individual endeavor (albeit conducted serially in a “chop chain” of
review) and the “work” of discourse as essentially the transmission of
information, the culture’s occasional engagement with discourse in-
struction came in the simplistic form of individual tutelage in prose
style. George’s MA thesis explored this phenomenon in depth, mak-
ing provocative suggestions for local writing practice and instruction
that would make use of reader-response theory and thus exploit one
of the elements of the domain of professional authorship more fully.
His work demonstrates the enormity of the rift between the academy
and the workplace in understandings of discourse and its workings,
and suggests some of the work which remains to be done in represent-
ing the interests of writing in the workplace.
     The most immediate channel for doing so would seem to be pro-
fessional writers who circulate between the two zones. To represent
their expertise in postmodern modes of composing more fully to their
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   159


coworkers, they will need instruction in various aspects of discourse
as outlined in chapter 6 and they will need concrete examples drawn
from their daily work as illustration—hence, once again, the enormous
value of cultivating varying approaches to reflexive practice and to
documenting one’s engagement in collective procedures. Based on such
documentation, professional writers may draw upon teacherly subjec-
tivities to demonstrate ways in which social constructionism takes form
in specific cultures. As they inhabit these teacherly subjectivities (many
made available through discourses with which they maintain connec-
tions), other subjectivities are likely to be offered within organizational
structures, in particular those of managers.
     Lena’s research most directly addressed this aspect of professional
writing. When she interviewed the director of the association where
she was observing document processing and production, the director
lamented the fact that several of the able writers on staff would leave
after a few years, having exhausted possibilities for promotion and for
learning. If they wanted to remain with the organization, she predicted,
their only option would be to move into management. This option is
obviously at work in many cultures, judging by advertisements I receive
regularly from outfits offering seminars in organizational communica-
tions and publishing. Titles such as “publications manager,” “public
relations manager,” “communications manager,” and the like, wrought
in part by the complexities of composition in an informated age, pres-
age organizational positions in which the writer is positioned as a “man-
ager” of discursive production. In such an era, it seems critical that
we represent discursive production as already imbued with complex cul-
tural processes, local and larger, and that we contemplate the ways in
which new “management” positions can heed such representations.
     One possible avenue is through integrating our theory, research,
and instruction on discursive work with Frow’s notion of professional
classes as always classes in formation discussed in chapter 6. Undergird-
ing formations, he suggests, are ideological class relations, in which sem-
iotic constructions of the self take form and in which a sense of self-iden-
tity and identification of the social other emerges. As discussed earlier,
writers’ practices of journaling and reflective commentary on their writ-
ing can enhance work in this sphere enormously. Frow’s juxtaposition
of ideological class relations with political class relations and economic
class relations should prompt us to seize the latter as a highly perti-
nent sphere for representing writing’s interests in workplace cultures.
Precisely because workplace cultures are configured most strongly by
160   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


economic forces, we will need to point out the ways in which these
forces, ultimately concerned most centrally with the production of
value, are inextricably bound to forces and values in the other two
spheres. Now that we have dispensed with notions of writing as purely
transmissive and with discursive work as merely functional, it remains
our task to demonstrate repeatedly the ways in which values in the
ideological sphere relate to values in the economic sphere. As we un-
dertake this work as part of composition’s subject, we will need to
devise strategies in the political sphere, a central topic of chapter 8.
8   INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION
    AND REPRODUCTION

    Roy: How’d you like to go to Washington and work for the
       Justice Department? All I gotta do is pick up the phone, talk
       to Ed, and you’re in.
    Joe: In . . . what, exactly?
    Roy: Associate Assistant Something Big. Internal Affairs, heart of
       the woods, something nice with clout.
    Joe: Ed . . . ?
    Roy: Meese. The Attorney General.
    Joe: Oh.
    Roy: I just have to pick up the phone . . .
                                   —Tony Kushner, Angels in America

    Ito: The chance.
    Grace Jones: To refigure the self.
    Ito: To appropriate.
    Grace Jones: The accoutrements of power.
    Ito: To articulate.
    Grace Jones: A new identity.
                              —Dorinne Kondo, “Bad Girls: Theater,
                 Women of Color, and the Politics of Representation”




                                                                         161
162   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS




In Dorinne Kondo’s performative version of ethnography, Janice Ito,
“a young assistant professor who is thrilled with her new job at the
Mount Olympus of scholarship, Ivy University” (52), team talks with
Grace Jones as the two stroll down a fashion designer’s runway, clad
in Issey Miyake dresses and carrying Uzis. Ito is bent on academic suc-
cess yet struggling with various ideological and pragmatic demands that
go with the job; Jones is her pop idol, suddenly materializing in her
world to serve as both inspiration for her articulation of a politics of
representation and foil to her conceptualization of political identity in
narrowly academic terms. The chance to refigure the self—to articu-
late a new identity—comes to those who inhabit given identities cre-
atively, we glean from Jones’s later comments when Ito objects to Jones’s
having donned a leopard-skin suit and brandished a spear in Conan
the Barbarian.
     As one of the contributions to Behar and Gordon’s Women Writ-
ing Culture, Kondo’s essay takes up the complex issue of the politics
of representation within the field of ethnography, and the character
of Grace Jones in Kondo’s performative ethnography prompts musings
upon autoethnographic projects. As noted in chapter 3, when Mary
Louise Pratt popularized the term in English circles, she defined auto-
ethnography as “a text in which people undertake to describe them-
selves in ways that engage with representations others have made of
them” (35). To articulate a postmodern, feminist, autoethnographic
identity, Kondo’s scene implies, subjects should be prepared to engage
with the identities that specific cultures regularly offer, even if these
identities as initially offered appear objectionable.
     Such is the engagement with identity that the domain of profes-
sional authorship would currently seem to require of professional writ-
ers. That is, given the ready-made subjectivities of “functionary,” “sup-
port staff,” “ghost” (chapter 4), or even “robot” (Slack, Miller, Doak)
that are offered to professional writers most often by workplace cul-
tures where writing is represented as essentially reflective of rather than
constitutive of realities, where discourse is a mode of transmission
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   163


rather than an apparatus for the production of meaning—these repre-
sentations linked to reductionist notions of authorship fostered by both
the academy and by popular media—the most salubrious tactic would
seem to be to engage with such subject positions in order to revise them.
Depending upon the culture and positions that are offered, engagement
may mean little more than putting up with limiting notions of iden-
tity until one can move to a better culture. (This tactic has been voiced
by several of the researchers represented here, particularly those work-
ing in cultures which are customarily the most top-down and constrict-
ing: trade associations.) Such cultures will undoubtedly resist revision
from the bottom up, certainly from one lone agent whose professional
class carries so little clout, which should prod academics who prepare
such agents for their positions to investigate other means of interven-
tion in local cultures and in cultural processes.
     Intervening in cultural processes beyond the walls of the academy
may strike compositionists as foreign, but in professional writing schol-
arship such a mandate has been taking form over the last few years,
leading Rachel Spilka to speak in 1993 of “influencing workplace prac-
tices” through curriculum design and research. That professional writ-
ing scholarship should be the field to forward this mandate derives not
only from its object of study but from the methodologies that have most
informed this study. From the earliest ventures into workplace cultures
by academics in rhetoric and composition, the primary fieldwork meth-
odology has been ethnography (see Odell and Goswami), and at least
two approaches to ethnographic inquiry—applied ethnography and
feminist ethnography—lobby explicitly for intervention in the culture
under study. In “Applied Anthropology and Post-Modernist Ethnog-
raphy,” Agneta M. Johannsen notes that “applied anthropology is
mainly characterized by intervention” (71), observing in the process
that “interpretive anthropology especially focuses on the principle that
to characterize people in any way is to intervene in their lives” (77),
which has been a principle at the heart of feminist anthropology, amply
demonstrated in Women Writing Culture. As professional writing
scholars seeking rigor both in our methodologies and in our position-
ing with respect to epistemologies tied to those methodologies, it makes
perfect sense to recognize intervention in cultural processes as part of
our work.
     It also makes sense to take up the issue of cultural intervention
within the broader landscape of postsecondary curriculum design. To
speak of cultural processes in terms of cultural production and repro-
164   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


duction is to invoke the work of Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Pas-
seron, who in Reproduction in Education, Society, and Culture return
to Bourdieu’s notion of a habitus, “the product of internalization of
the principles of a cultural arbitrary capable of perpetuating itself af-
ter pedagogical action has ceased and thereby of perpetuating in prac-
tices the principles of the internalized arbitrary” (31). Bourdieu and
Passeron use habitus to characterize the ways in which the French
educational system reproduces class distinctions even when federal in-
terventions have been taken to prompt more egalitarian access to high-
status disciplines. Though their interpretations of class formation strike
one as oversimplified in the light of class scholarship since the book’s
publication, their observations on educational institutions’ unwitting
collusion with forces in the sphere of production that reproduce the
status quo are well taken. Such observations implicate curriculum de-
sign and return us once again to the realm of curriculum theory. To
the element of students’ self-actualization as part of curriculum noted
in chapter 6, ethnographic inquiry as framed in this archaeological work
lobbies implicitly for adding social reconstruction (Eisner and Val-
lance), since work at the level of discursive constructions of the sub-
ject always entails work at the level of social systems as intertwined
with discursive processes. Sidelined earlier in the century as invalid
curricular material during the Taylorization of the academy and par-
ticularly of writing instruction, social reconstructionism is likely
to reemerge as cultural forces so closely allied with Taylorization wane
in the informated age.
     As this shift occurs, composition will be positioned to take advan-
tage of it in novel ways by virtue of having taken on discursive con-
structions of subjectivity as one of its foci. In so doing, composition
commits itself to inquiries into the replication of status quo subjec-
tivities within educational institutions and, by extension, to the inter-
ventions necessary to aid students in achieving their maximum self-
actualization. With respect to professional writing, at the very least,
compositionists have a mandate—grounded in this composer-centered
field—to investigate the ways in which status quo subjectivities required
by the workplace in an earlier economic era are replicated through cur-
rent discursive practices, to strive to revise these practices, and to share
these investigations and rationales for revision with students. Primary
to this rationale is the principle that the writing subject has been shaped
dramatically and systematically by current-traditional composition
epistemology and institutional locations of writing instruction that
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   165


sunder “real” selves from their discursive representations in specific
ways—intervening, as it were, in the subject’s range of possible entries
into discourse.
     Countering the effects of this protracted and systematic interven-
tion will require diverse and equally protracted efforts, given the scope
and depth of these earlier forces bearing on discursive subjectivities.
Yet the time for such counterintervention would seem ripe, owing to
at least three developments in the past decade or so: (1) theories for ap-
prehending the complexities of discursive constructions of subjectiv-
ities—of the ways in which the social constructionist elements of lan-
guage and discourse practices shape our identities—have finally made
their ways to composition studies; (2) the shifts in our national econ-
omy, particularly as global capitalism has positioned U.S. economy,
render earlier subjectivities required by the workplace archaic and even
counterproductive; (3) developments in technology have revolution-
ized discursive circuits, opening channels for reshaping subjectivities
and for reimagining rhetorics, as Carolyn Miller’s observations noted
in the previous chapter underscore. I discuss some implications of each
of these factors against the backdrop of this archaeology below.

Discursive Sites of Intervention
The most immediately relevant discursive site for investigation and
intervention is the writing subject. In chapter 6 ideas are presented for
repositioning this subject as part of the larger project of re-presenting
discursive work in the academy. In the pages that follow, these ideas
are extended for their applications in an interventionist approach to
writing subjectivities in the realms of the individual, of a professional
class, and of virtual forums.

Individual Sites

When conceptualized as a site at which social forces struggle to enter
discourse, the “I” of the professional writer stands as a key point in
intervening in cultural reproduction. The erasure of the “I” through
current-traditional composition epistemology has been roundly sec-
onded by workplace discursive practices, judging by the reports of
researchers in this book, rendering this site somewhat inaccessible. Yet
through rethinking authorship as a part of instrumental discourse and
conceptualizing a domain of professional authorship, the purview of
166   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


the professional writer’s “I” becomes clear: “real” authorship entails
“managing” the many contributors to an organizational document (in-
cluding in some cases end users providing feedback) and imagining the
document’s ultimate effects in local and larger cultures, as noted in
chapter 7. Otherwise stated, the “I” of the real author, even when not
evidenced in texts, becomes politically and poetically positioned among
many social forces in extremely complex ways. Intervening in cultural
production and reproduction entails equipping professional writers for
such positioning intellectually in classrooms and collaborating with
them later in the ongoing processes and products in which each “I”
becomes implicated.
     If we ponder Louise Phelps’s observation on the “disappearing
boundary” between authors and audiences and if we accept the valid-
ity of extending to instrumental discourse James Clifford’s observation
that every positing of an “other” in discourse is a simultaneous con-
struction of a “self,” then clearly one of our projects in the academy
must entail assessing various discursive practices and traditions for their
potential in intervention. That is, in addition to imagining courses in
organizational studies and classroom work on students’ “I’s” as ma-
terial, we might comb discursive horizons for practices and traditions
that offer occasions for deconstructing notions of the “I” as an originat-
ing, transcendent ego. Most traditions in English work against such po-
sitioning, paradoxically, which is one reason why collaborative compo-
sition courses hold such promise. But in addition to such courses, we
might nurture course design that makes connections with fields that tra-
ditionally position writers as spokespeople rather than transcendent egos.
     Ethnography and folklore are two such fields, based on my expe-
rience in this archaeological undertaking. While it is true that each of
these fields currently replicates in scholarly publications the “major
author” mode that academic notoriety requires, they nonetheless de-
mand of these authors a cultural validation of tales uncommon in most
English studies: the ethnographer and the folklorist employ method-
ologies explicitly to this end, thus constructing an “author” who is
directly responsible to local cultures. And while Ph.D. writers in these
traditions display such responsibility in writing about cultures, pro-
fessional writers could display such responsibility while writing with-
in cultures.
     We can prepare grounds for interventionist action via the individual
writer by writing such responsibility for cultural validation into our
composition epistemology and practices. James Zebroski and Nancy
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   167


Mack have observed the power of ethnographic writing in heighten-
ing critical consciousness among students; what I am signaling is the
power of such writing for heightening collective consciousness among
all of us who convey fundamental philosophies about writing subjects
through the very conceptualization of courses. My experience in teach-
ing such a course (at the undergraduate level) has taught me that a
recurrent focus becomes that of the writer’s ways and means of vali-
dating observations on a culture. Even writers who do extremely well
in courses positioning them as independent originators of writing have
difficulty learning how and when and why to seek cultural validation
for discourse depicting a culture. In the domain of professional author-
ship, such a discursive identity is indispensable.
     Equally indispensable is an individual identity that assesses the
culture with respect to larger cultures. The politics of representation,
as ethnographers know, requires an ongoing questioning of who speaks
for whom, to whom, and under what conditions. Just as rethinking
ethnography in the postcolonial era has led some ethnographers to eye
the uses of ethnographic representation with vigilance, so might our
course work with individual writers in this tradition foster a similar
vigilance over cultural representations and reproductions via instru-
mental discourse in workplace cultures. Because the workplace culture
is always situated in our larger culture, such vigilance is not only jus-
tified but necessary. The work on ethos cited in chapter 7 speaks to
this issue, as does the burgeoning research on writers’ subjectivities as
shaped by computers. As Cynthia and Richard Selfe observe, “We are
already constituted both as technological and cultural subjects, cre-
ated in part by the machines we ourselves have created and written
continually in our discursive practices on these machines” (352). Part
of our interventionist project as technological and cultural subjects
surely must entail monitoring the contours of individual subjectivity
as technology shapes it, combating the politics of amnesia as we de-
velop our rhetorics from technology. Sharing the knowledge produced
through such monitoring among professional writers, scholars, and
other members of the workplace constitutes an intervention in indi-
vidual subjectivity as compelling as any other in composition history.
     Catherine Belsey speaks of the “displacement of subjectivities
across a range of discourses” (65), and as I scan the lists in chapter 5,
I can imagine the ways in which subjectivities are displaced across some
of the specific discourses of the workplace represented in this archae-
ology. I imagine writers encountering discourses from other profes-
168   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


sional classes and from other intellectual traditions, working to effect
meanings that the professional writer must interpret. When I review
representations of themselves as writers in appendix B, though, they
seem unprepared to theorize relations between displacements and re-
sponsibilities. If we glance through the appendixes further, we can see
that professional writers are quite capable of working within the eth-
nographic writing tradition to produce discursive subjectivities allow-
ing entry to such theorizing. Part of our work in intervening in cul-
tural reproduction should entail our working with these writers to
probe how such writerly subjectivities take form as part of a profes-
sional class.

Class Sites

My work as instructor of Cultures of Professional Writing each term
entailed constructing tables similar to those in appendix B and appen-
dix C so that course participants could see how their work compared
with that of peers and so that they might begin to glean contours of
writers as a professional class. If we are to intervene effectively in cul-
tural production and reproduction, investigating the contours of this
professional class as they solidify and shift is indispensable. Such in-
vestigations can proceed from many points of departure. Depicting the
production of all writers in a course as a set supports in-class discus-
sion of the terms of the set. Whereas I have chosen topics and themes
as valuable to a discussion of organizational and discursive features
deemed pertinent by professional writers engaged in organizational
analysis, one might equally devote tables or charts to the specifics of
whole writing projects undertaken by a group of professional writers.
Doing so would enable even finer discerning of the current scopes of
writers’ purview in the domain of professional authorship.
    Comparing organizational charts across workplace cultures also
supports enhanced understandings of professional writers as a specific
class. Inevitably, these organization charts show writers situated on the
margins of their cultures, or at the lower echelons. Comparing their
positions in workplace cultures with those of professionals from other
classes, along with study of the educational backgrounds and work-
place experiences required (or professed) by other professionals, could
enable a critical consciousness at the level of discursive formations,
which in turn might enable the envisioning of intervention in the name
of a class’s value to the organization. As an individual, it is often dif-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   169


ficult to discern where and how such values are constructed, yet as a
class, such constructions are more easily discernible by virtue of the
relations and recurrent positions rendered visible.
     As a site of intervention in cultural production and reproduction,
the professional class of writers currently offers little leverage in work-
place cultures because of its low status, yet this status could change
with shifts in organization of workplace cultures towards high value.
For those cultures seeking high value configurations to support new
production of knowledge, employing writing as a mode of learning and
discourse as an apparatus for the production of meaning, the profes-
sional class of writer could re-form with greater status and say in cul-
tural production. In his discussion of class formation, John Frow speaks
of class interests as “hypotheses, more or less rationally calculated (or
miscalculated)” (105). As a site of intervention, we might hypothesize
the interests of professional writers as they fit in workplace cultures.
Chapter 6 implies hypotheses in the ideological sphere, grounded in
the symbolic capital with which we provide professional writers and
always already linked to discursive constructions of self and other as
our composition epistemologies enable them. This capital can be par-
layed in the sphere of production when discursive representations are
recognized as a site where not only cultural capital but also economic
capital take form. The political world turns on such a principle, but
perhaps because composition epistemology has for so long eschewed
politics under pretense of neutrality, professionals trained in writing
have been at a loss to identify and act upon political agendas in the
interests of their class.
     Such work would seem to lie before us, and as we undertake it,
we would do well to hypothesize interests that heed all the relations
of the domain of professional authorship. The onus of explaining the
interrelatedness of “users” and “authors” might fall to writers in their
roles as discourse teachers, and to this end it behooves us all to take
up such topics regularly in discursive forums conceptualized not just
for colleagues in the academy but for discourse workers in various
contexts and at various levels. At least one hard-copy forum in which
academics speak to professional writers (and vice versa) on issues of
cultural production and reproduction would be a valuable first step
in hypothesizing this class’s future interests. Virtual forums will be
indispensable, both as means of drawing together writers dispersed
geographically and as means of exchanging information on the moni-
toring of cultural production immediately and at will.
170   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Virtual Sites

If considerations of writers as a class of professionals enhance our
understanding of writer subjectivities through the organizational fac-
tors introduced, then considerations of virtual sites of representation
enhance our understanding of writer subjectivities by expanding the
“organizational” beyond traditional structures. In fact, such expan-
sion may be influencing organizational dynamics in ways unbeknownst
even to organizational players at the tops of organization charts, if
Shoshana Zuboff is correct in her predictions about the ways in which
“informating” is changing the nature of the workplace. That is, even
in the absence of organizational restructuring for high-value produc-
tion (as evidenced by most of the studies in this archaeology), ad hoc
restructuring may be at work through new flows of information. The
fact that organizations already employ software to monitor employee
Internet use in a twenty-first-century enactment of nineteenth-century
panopticism clearly signals new information circuitry. Discursive reach
among workplace culture members, it would seem, has been revolu-
tionized by the Internet in ways still to be explored.
    So have writers’ touchstones for style, judging by Gary’s study of
World Wide Web site maintenance by a job bank and software pro-
vider. With no previous professional writing experience, Gary went to
his site with notions of style garnered from instruction in writing in
the English essay tradition, only to find tantalizing guidelines offered
by “writers” from business and marketing grounded in one principle:
what kind of writing invited and sustained visits to the site. On one
level, such an observation points to the market discourse that drives
many workplace cultures (see chapter 5), yet on another level, the ob-
servation augurs progressive conceptualization of cultural discursive
production that brings audience and users into the authoring process.
By bringing audiences into real authorship of a culture’s discursive
products, one might argue, intervention in cultural reproduction is
made possible in ways hitherto impossible.
    Such scenarios for intervention have existed for some time in the
realm of technical writing via feedback procedures aimed at usability
or readability. It seems inevitable that these scenarios will expand to
other domains, if only by virtue of the cultural porosity enhanced by
the Web. And indeed, major public institutions are increasing “trans-
parency” by placing documents on the Web and integrating them into
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   171


cultural processes. Though the content of these documents is no doubt
carefully screened, the accessibility might in many cases reposition
users, particularly if we think of the government sites represented in
this archaeology (see appendix B). Other possible scenarios include
forums in which outsiders to an organization might post commentary
on that organization’s engagement with respect to the larger culture;
such publications already exist in hard-copy form, of course, but the
Web offers means for collecting and threading them in novel ways.
     Concurrent with such virtual interventions that bring audiences
into authoring in valuable ways will be virtual interventions linked to
the class of professionals known as writers. Now this class can share
information among its constituents concerning their conditions of
existence; writers can represent these conditions to other writers much
in the ways that participants in Cultures of Professional writing have
represented such conditions to one another in flesh and blood. Using
these virtual forums constitutes ideological intervention and invites
contributions from discourse workers in the workplace and the acad-
emy. Cynthia Selfe proposes using forums such as e-mail in ways spe-
cific to intervention in cultural reproduction, to “support discursive
forums that serve to flatten more traditionally constructed hierarchies
in business, organizations, and governments by connecting individu-
als directly to decision makers and to the information used in making
decisions” (258), which dovetails with observations above and else-
where in this archaeology concerning circuits of information flow in
the domain of professional writing. Selfe sees such virtual forums as
part of a larger trend in the postmodern era in which grand narratives
(which always work ideologically through selective attention) are en-
feebled through the multiplication of discourses (and hence alterna-
tive narratives), which in turn offer more opportunities for agency and
resistance (285). Focusing some narratives on the interests of profes-
sional writers as a class, how these interests do and do not connect with
interests of other classes (and indeed with ultimate audiences in the
domain of professional writing), and where and how these relations
figure in values produced and sustained through local cultural work
can perhaps bolster interventions by writers in realms previously ex-
cluded to them. At least some of these narratives should be grounded
in the petits recits such as found in archaeologies, enabling individual
writers, perhaps, to link the petits recits from other locales to their own,
cognitively mapping their positions ever more globally.
172   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Organizational Sites of Intervention
The chapter epigraph from Angels in America is in part about the
construction of exclusive realms through networking, in this case po-
litical networking between New York and Washington in the mid-eight-
ies. The character of Roy Cohn (based on the real-life New York at-
torney and power broker), facing disbarment, needs a well-placed pawn
in the Justice Department to represent his interests—hence his offer
to clerk Joe Pitt. The vituperative Cohn is dishonest, maliciously evil,
and extremely powerful, being well connected within the Republican
Party not only to Attorney General Meese but even via Nancy Reagan
to the President. As the play unfolds and we witness Cohn’s Machia-
vellian tactics, we come to realize, as does the naive Joe Pitt, that Cohn
indeed has only to pick up the phone to place a player in the upper
echelons of a major government organization.
     This representation of political networking manifested by actors
as emanating primarily from the professional class of attorney requires
no willing suspension of disbelief on the part of a Washington audience,
for our days are dappled with similar discursive scenes, be it through
the local press or through occasional unfortunate real-life encounters.
(Edwin Meese, attorney general under President Reagan during the
Iran-Contra debacle and current activist against freedom of speech on
the Internet through his support of the Communications Decency Act,
was named to my university’s Board of Visitors by Republican gover-
nor George Allen; in 1999 Meese became Rector.) In many organiza-
tions in and around the Washington area, particularly those associated
with government or its lobbying, selection, and positioning of huge
numbers of organizational players has much more to do with politi-
cal interests than with relevant expertise. Organization charts that be-
nignly depict these players and positions, never hinting at the interests
or networks behind them, offer little more than faint intimations of
the complexities of organizational authorship.
     Such were the organizations studied by 32 of the 84 researchers
in this archaeology (appendix C). Another 36 studied organizations
in the private sector, where players’ interests are admittedly tied more
closely to market demands, and organizational authorship is thus
shaped by different kinds of politics: here professionals from business
classes and others wield the strongest influence in cultural production
and reproduction. The remaining researchers studied educational in-
stitutions and nonprofits, encountering the political shaping of author-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   173


ship in varying degrees depending upon the topics and themes explored.
Even in this last category, where the play of politics often appears most
innocent, the forces bearing upon organizational authorship as re-
searchers could discern them in just one semester nearly always sug-
gested further lines of inquiry into the interests behind these forces.
(See the abstracts of researchers in this category, along with the topics
and themes they explored in appendixes B and D.)
     The issue of interests as represented through organizational author-
ship cannot be overemphasized, neither as theoretical insights on class
formations as intricately tied to relationality of interests across eco-
nomic, ideological, and political spheres urges empirical inquiry into
the conditions underpinning such relations (see Brodkey, “On the
Subjects”) nor as scholarship in the informated age on professional
writing poses questions not easily answered in an era of shifting orga-
nizational and discursive formations. Computerized composition schol-
ars Cynthia and Richard Selfe pose such questions, and although they
use the title “technical communicators” to designate organizational
writers largely because such writers are most easily associated with
electronic composing, we can substitute the title “professional writer,”
as I have done elsewhere in this archaeology, not only to tap the valu-
able scholarship coming from technical writing but also because the
titles are often used synonymously and interchangeably in organiza-
tional settings. Selfe and Selfe ask:

    To whom are technical communicators responsible? Their corporate
    employers? The public who uses the corporation’s products? The pro-
    fessional societies to which they belong? Who is responsible for the in-
    formation that technical communicators produce? Who controls the in-
    formation technical communicators produce? Why is this so? Whose
    interests are being served in controlling information and in defining the
    various roles and responsibilities of technical communicators in the way
    that we now do? (330)

As inscribers of cultures, managing organizational writing in the do-
main of professional authorship, professional writers are responsible
to large numbers of people in ways that are occluded by current roles
and responsibilities as configured in most organizational settings.
Hence we are not only justified in claiming rights to interventions by
professional writers and their discursive collaborators in cultural pro-
duction and reproduction, we are obligated—even impelled—to do so
in the interest of knowledge both theoretical and utilitarian in an era
174   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


of changing discursive and organizational formations. Deborah Brandt
observes ways in which literacy is always multiply “sponsored,” not-
ing that different kinds of sponsorship construct subjects differently.
If we revisit the sites discussed in chapter 3 and the work and posi-
tions documented in them for the ways that literacy sponsorship is
already shaping subjects, we can imagine interventions (and can hy-
pothesize class interests) to form new unities from this earlier archaeo-
logical work, as follows.
     In commercial organizations (see appendix C), part of writers’
work should entail a philosophical situating of the local culture vis-à-
vis larger cultural trends, as writers manage implied authorship. The
philosophy invoked would be one not only of ethics and civic human-
ism (see Thomas Miller) but also of pragmatism, as the local culture
seeks optimum articulations with norms and values evidenced in larger
and exterior cultures. Even in businesses such as public relations firms,
whose sole raison d’être is the discursive representations of outside
clients, organizational authorship entails negotiating these represen-
tations in consumer cultures. Because such cultures are always imbued
with mediations of representations emanating from other sources, the
professional writer must select and deploy clients’ representations ju-
diciously. Otherwise stated, the writer engages in ideological work, and
intervention in such work entails at the very least theorizing the terms
of selection and deployment.
     As an example, Ann, who works as a writer for a public relations
firm, extended her work in Cultures of Professional Writing into an
MA thesis, in which she explored the processes whereby an all-female
business shaped the voices of all-male clients for various media. Her
inquiry naturally took her to feminist theory and works such as Belenky
et al.’s Women’s Ways of Knowing in order to depict the kinds of
knowledge about discursive forms that she and her colleagues had built
over the years and to contrast this knowledge with that of their cli-
ents. Part of their work entailed teaching their clients about discursive
features in the realm of public relations, and herein lies great potential:
as we collaborate with such writers through academic liaisons, the
theories we harken to imply specific kinds of responsibilities, relation-
ality, and alliance with other groups, defined in part by professional
class and also by gender, race, and other traits.
     The interests of such groups might enter the domain of professional
authorship via the circuits open to users, consumers, and other audi-
ences implicated in organizational authorship. As such, interventions
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   175


by professional writers may well entail taking the position of “advo-
cate” cited earlier. If we recall Jeff’s discovery through his interviews
with engineers that technical editors in his culture were unwittingly un-
dermining the engineers’ authority by unstringing noun strings, we can
imagine future scenarios in which those noun strings might indeed need
to be unstrung for interpretation by a nonengineering audience. In the
role of advocate for audiences (and end users), his editing work could
even entail pursuing questions and objections raised in their interests
(or that he would anticipate in their interests) within the organization.
     Alongside the role of advocate might be considered the role of
lookout—as writers positioned as nodes or links with extraorgani-
zational cultures scan discursive horizons for information and knowl-
edge that shapes the local culture. Starla’s job of clipping daily news
items she deems relevant to her organization represents a form of in-
tervention with great potential, depending upon the ways in which
organizations position these writers in information flows and the ways
in which educational institutions prepare them intellectually.
     Professional writers might also intervene in those cultural processes
that are more self-contained within an organization. Some research-
ers in business cultures studied in this archaeology have already done
so, either literally through discursive intervention or philosophically
through themes addressed in their organizational analysis: Nyck com-
posed formal policy regarding employees’ duties and rights and had it
instituted at his office, and Red harkened in his ethnography to news-
paper industry traditions being scuttled at his newspaper through the
introduction of time clocks for reporters. Rex noted ways in which
discursive practices reinforced certain organizational structures at his
site of study, thus implying possible interventions by writers should
those structures support counterproductive values, and Lisa similarly
identified a reproduction of cultural values through discursive prac-
tice. In her final ethnography, she states: “Since discursive practice is
defined as rationalizations used for the production of meanings, it
would then follow that the editing process is yet another set of ratio-
nalizations for rationalizations previously constructed (the written
text)” (12).
     We can imagine similar conceptualizations of intervention in gov-
ernment agencies and institutions as depicted in appendix C. Seeing
these conceptualizations through to realization might prove more dif-
ficult, given the frequent layers of bureaucracy and politically moti-
vated decisions. George’s insightful suggestions for introducing some
176   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


instruction in reader-response theory at his military headquarters or-
ganization as an alternative to the pointless instruction in prose style
went unheeded, yet it remains a valuable intellectual intervention as
we elaborate our understandings of organizational authorship and ways
of integrating audiences into authoring circuits. Other researchers in
government settings conceptualized similar frameworks for interven-
tions in discursive practices: Helen through her analysis of magazine
editors’ construction of implied authorship as replicating certain cul-
tural norms and values, and Gloria through a similar analysis of im-
plied authorship in correspondence composed across divisions at the
Library of Congress. Pragmatic interventions in such sites will undoubt-
edly require sustained efforts on the part of professional writers, per-
haps in concert with professionals from other classes, which is all the
more reason to cultivate connections with these classes under the ae-
gis of shared values.
     In the trade associations represented in appendix C, intervention
seems relatively unfeasible, except when writers are positioned such
as Kyle was to solicit and edit articles for the association’s publications
with a fair amount of license. But as noted earlier, his professional pur-
view as a writer was the exception rather than the rule in this category
of workplace. More often, content of even the most mundane nature
is carefully monitored, owing to the hegemony of political discourse
in local practices, and if writers and their allies are to conceptualize
intervention, their efforts would be better placed in intellectual inter-
ventions by writers in their own discursive, theoretical, and political
understandings—since in most cases they will leave such workplaces
for better employ after short stints.
     Finally, the category of educational institutions as organizational
sites for intervention strikes most closely to home for those of us with
a direct stake in the goals of these institutions. Writers’ work and posi-
tions in these institutions as depicted in appendix C lobby for inter-
vention in curriculum design and classroom practices, of course, yet
they also lobby for intervention in extracurricular circuits (see the ab-
stracts of Alice, Emma, Jillian, Julie, Lee, and Marla). To do so, one
might draw upon the work of Anne Ruggles Gere on the “extracur-
riculum,” which identifies the need for academics investigating and
teaching discursive practices in classrooms to learn from the practices
of grassroots community writing groups, formed in the name of a cause.
She says: “As we consider our own roles of social agency we can insist
more firmly on the democracy of writing and the need to enact peda-
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   177


gogies that permit connections and communication with the commu-
nities outside classroom walls” (91). Her stance is echoed by James
Slevin in terms of the very disciplinarity of composition studies:

    At the heart of the educational practice I propose is a reconceptualizing
    of disciplinarity so that its intellectual work is located in encounters with
    students and in the projects that arise from these encounters. What we
    need is a sense of disciplinary work that supports and even makes pos-
    sible these developments, a sense of “discipline” that allows literacy work-
    ers (teachers and students) in various institutional sites (academic and
    nonacademic) to feel the importance of what they do and to recognize
    their connections with one another. (160)

     Intervention, along such lines, would entail deconstructing the
philosophical boundaries that accompany the institutional boundaries
of our colleges and universities in ways that admit and legitimize in-
strumental discourse elaborated in workplace cultures. Such interven-
tions have already been proposed—perennially, in fact—yet usually in
ways that suggest the kinds of collusion in cultural reproduction dis-
cussed in the chapter introduction. The interventions I refer to valorize
instrumental discourses as topics of critical analysis to be undertaken
in the elaboration of writing formations. As such, they will position
their students not as uncritical subjects but as future inscribers of work-
place cultures, tasked with the enormous responsibility of scrutiniz-
ing the discourses and discursive practices implicated in such inscrip-
tion for the norms and values they produce and reproduce.
     To ignore this extracurriculum is tantamount to political suicide
for discourse workers, given the recent trends at the national level
among students towards undertaking postsecondary education con-
current with work. At my state university, for example, the majority
of students support themselves partially through jobs and take five or
six years to complete an undergraduate degree. Recent federal subsi-
dies for similar structuring of tertiary education in community colleges
augurs similar scenarios which, when considered alongside the num-
bers of people pursuing advanced degrees in discourse studies while
holding full-time jobs, compels us to theorize this situation. Such en-
gagement dramatically limits a person’s time and opportunities for edi-
fication in cultural issues or for civic engagement, which renders Mary
Beth Debs’s suggestion in chapter 4 that the organization has become
the major arena for public life for the individual in modern Western
civilization simultaneously tantalizing and ominous. With the increased
178    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


speed in cultural processes effected through computers, political impli-
cations of the products of authorship can be easily overlooked, mean-
ing that whether or not we admit it, writers in workplace cultures are
engaged in political work by default. Surely, it behooves us to investi-
gate the discursive contours of this work in the academy.
     In tandem with technological developments, other cultural pro-
cesses have increased in speed, including those processes that make use
of professional writers in a post-Fordist era of flexibility. The flexibil-
ity of labor produced by recent national economies clearly benefits org-
anization players at the upper echelons at the expense of those in lower
positions (Harvey). If we are to align ourselves epistemologically and
politically with discourse workers whom popular (and academic) ide-
ologies would position in these lower positions as functionaries, then
it becomes our work to take up intervention in cultural production and
reproduction as part of our job as compositionists, cultural scholars,
and certainly as academics in professional writing. If we do not, scenar-
ios such as the one composed by Kali, based on her real-life witness-
ing of hiring and firing and enacted by course participants during a
writing workshop, could well become a recurrent tale among profes-
sional writers. Her scenario depicts a Kafkaesque culture in which
writers are fired and (perhaps) rehired so frequently through manage-
ment snafus that they are inured to termination:
      Kali: Here’s the setting: battleship-grey walls with rose flecks that are
         an attempt to add cheer but end up looking like blood stains. The
         floor plan is obviously cubes, but they’re attached in such a way as
         to resemble a maze as well. Everyone is walking around holding
         clipboards. Alan enters in a whirl, like a Tasmanian devil.
      “Alan”: Has anyone seen Mary? I need to find Mary. I need to fire
         Mary. I don’t want to, but someone upstairs messed up and I have
         to. Tell Mary I’m looking for her.
      [he exits; Mary enters]
      “Mary”: Has anyone seen Alan? He needs to fire me so I can get back
         to work. I need to get all this done before I go.
      [Alan reenters]
      Alan: Mary. There you are. You’re fired.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: I don’t want to be the one to tell you but I have to.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: It’s nothing you’ve done.
      Mary: I know.
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   179


    Alan: You’re a great employee.
    Mary: I know.
    Alan: Three weeks.
    Mary: I know.
                                                   —discussion in class, 4/9/97


Reforming Discursive Formations and Recapturing
Intellectual Dominion
In this workshop, Kali’s fictional scene was conducted as a class ac-
tivity in tandem with discussions of Dorinne Kondo’s ethnography cited
in the chapter epigraph. The workshop was suggested by guest scholar
Zofia Burr, who melds poetry writing with critical writing in construct-
ing her scholarship, which is otherwise grounded strongly in African-
American studies, women’s studies, and cultural studies. In introducing
herself to the class, she stressed that she saw the dichotomy “creative
writing/critical writing” as a false dichotomy against which she strug-
gled, and the workshop produced provocative “plays” of the kind cited
above that bore out her argument. Writers worked both creatively with-
in the approach of performative ethnography proposed by Kondo and
critically against the backdrop of a semester’s fieldwork and analysis
in a given workplace culture. Our goal in the workshop, much like the
goal in Kondo’s essay, was to shift momentarily to another mode of
composing in the interest of gleaning something about underlying re-
lations in culture. As Professor Burr put it:
    The live experience [of a staged scenario] really models for you the kind
    of problem you have as a writer to begin with: How are people who are
    situated in different places going to get into this? How am I going to
    represent people situated differently from myself? All of that. It’s all about
    being in relation. And the thing about figuring a drama, as opposed to
    figuring a poem, is that you really do think about bodies in relation to
    each other saying things that are potentially defining. (in class, 4/9/97)

In Kali’s scene above, the exchange between Alan and Mary is poten-
tially defining of the whole class of professional writers if we don’t in-
tervene to reconstruct composition epistemologies and liaisons among
discourse workers that recognize and theorize the creative and critical
elements of composing instrumental discourse. Through their discursive
work, professional writers daily reproduce (and potentially reconfig-
ure) the terms of being in relation in their specific culture, yet because
180   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


we have been remiss in recognizing such socially constructive acts for
the inscription of culture that they are, writers such as Mary find them-
selves wholly expendable. With the rise of the professional managerial
class (see Harvey) has come a construction of organizational author-
ship in which those most versed in writing find themselves most dis-
tanced from authoring by their lack of authority. As discourse work-
ers, we should seek to reclaim this dominion for fellow writers, and
we should concurrently reshape writing formations critical to exercis-
ing authority and responsibility in the domain of professional writing.
     We can begin by connecting curricular writing formations of pro-
fessional writers with reading formations such as discussed in chapter
6 to the ends of producing writers who are creative in their construc-
tions of reality via instrumental discourses and are equipped with theo-
ries and cultural awareness of the most critical sort. If I have seemed
overly dismissive of courses in which students write to an instructor
about literature and other texts, I should emphasize here that I see such
work as crucial, given the imbrication of reading formations and writ-
ing formations. When such courses are conceptualized as complemen-
tary to the constructions of writing formations rather than constitu-
tive of them, they can aid writers enormously. Indeed, invaluable work
takes place in courses with carefully selected texts and contextu-
alization that enables situating these texts amid cultural (and multicul-
tural) processes past and present. Courses such as those described by
Richard Miller or Phyllis van Slyck, in which the classroom setting is
construed as a “contact zone” in which the cultures coming into the
classroom with students become a part of curricular material, enable
negotiations of representations and repositionings in light of multiple
theories and multiple perspectives among those students. Such read-
ing formations can link with writing practices in valuable ways, as writ-
ers in organizational settings tap discursive theories and experiences
to make decisions in the ongoing inscriptions of workplace cultures.
     When scholars and educators such as Miller and van Slyck use the
term “contact zones,” they invoke the autoethnographic project, since
the term became popularized by Mary Louise Pratt in the same essay
that transported autoethnography from anthropological to literary cir-
cles. And indeed, spatial tropes have often been employed to depict dis-
cursive work under the postmodern umbrella, since one feature of post-
modern discourse is that of border crossings. These tropes have enabled
insight in particular with respect to cultural differences grounded in
ethnicity and regionality, for example, for obvious reasons: particu-
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   181


larly if students from various “zones” are present in one classroom,
experiences and interpretations emanating from these zones can be
aired. But a similar task with respect to professional class is more dif-
ficult to accomplish, both because most students in most classrooms
are not yet fully vested members of those classes and because academic
structures are such that once class formation does begin with special-
ization, students encounter only students of their own specialization
and class in formation.
     It would seem that we need tropes to complement autoethno-
graphy’s “zones” for conceptualizing and engendering exchanges be-
tween the academy and the workplace in the name of cultural inter-
ventions and under the aegis of authorship in instrumental discourse.
Because the “zone” has proven a productive trope and perhaps to ar-
ticulate more easily the knowledge generated through this trope, we
might think in terms of “space,” particularly in an age of virtuality
and its forums. Working within the philosophical tradition, Jacques
Derrida has spoken of a “becoming space” that Patti Lather draws
upon in conceptualizing inquiry that bridges postmodern and feminist
theory: “A science capable of grasping the continual interplay of agen-
cy, structure, and context requires a ‘becoming space’ . . . where we
can think and act with one another into the future in ways that both
mark and loosen limits” (101). Forming such a space, against the work
of this archaeology and in pursuit of bringing to organizational au-
thorship the theoretical and pragmatic attention it deserves, would
require players from both academic and workplace contexts construct-
ing theories of practice that explore the interplay of both structure and
agency in the processes and products of authorship. Kurt Spellmeyer
has asked, “Are we prepared to recognize nonspecialists as genuine
collaborators in the making of knowledge?” (“Inventing the Univer-
sity Student” 44), and this archaeology answers his question with a
resounding “We must.” Collaborating genuinely—thinking and act-
ing with one another—will of a necessity entail inspecting the terms
of “being in relation” of which Zofia Burr speaks, which should push
us relentlessly—as members of the class of discourse workers—towards
mapping the continual interplays among the ideological, productive,
and political spheres shaping our being and in which cultural values
take form.
     Tony Bennett has spoken of “strategic interventions within the
operating procedures and policy agendas of specific cultural institu-
tions” (32), and while he is thinking more of interventions among
182   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


players from a variety of professional classes usually positioned in more
powerful positions than writers in organizations, his appeal applies to
professional writers in their day-to-day inscriptions of culture. As we
take steps to enhance the theorizing of and ongoing empirical research
in organizational authorship and as we conceptualize new reading and
writing formations to prepare discourse workers for their positions, we
would do well to acknowledge the lack of political impetus to act that
we have provided to date. Such a lack looms large, given the degree to
which we have shaped political interpretations in reading formations
in recent years. Kondo’s play is illustrative: the character of Janice Ito
is invited by Grace Jones to try on the accoutrements of power, which
we realize can be little more than a temporary fitting for Ito in current
political arenas. Compared with the character of Roy Cohn in Kush-
ner’s play, at least, the real political clout of Ito is negligible.
     As for Cohn, he is facing not only disbarment but also his impend-
ing death, though he refuses to admit it. He has contracted AIDS
through homosexual sex, we glean, yet he forbids his doctor during
the diagnosis (under threat of destroying the doctor’s practice) even
to pronounce the word “homosexual,” since such a representation of
Cohn in his circles of power would mean his undoing. Thus Angels in
America informs us not only about political networking to construct
and maintain realms of exclusion but also about the politics of repre-
sentation. Reading the play in 2000, in the age of protease inhibitors
that offer extended life until perhaps even a cure for AIDS is found
for people infected with HIV, we remember the early years of the plague
in which the play is set and the pointed refusal of the Reagan admin-
istration to respond quickly to this disease. Gay interpretations of this
refusal point to the equation of AIDS with homosexuals in the mid-
eighties and long-standing homophobia in the Republican Party which
condoned gay genocide through selective inattention. Had interven-
tions in research, treatment, and education occurred earlier, such in-
terpretations argue, many who have died might still be among us, and
the epidemic that now sweeps the world might have been mollified.
     The character of Cohn illustrates a particular kind of politics of
representation, in which personal gain or the gain of a select group is
inordinately augmented by blocking comprehensive and multidimen-
sional interpretations of social facts. Such interpretations have long
been at the core of feminist theory, African-American studies, gay stud-
ies, cultural studies, and others, yet the power suggested through such
reading formations hasn’t been connected with writing formations. One
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   183


of the reasons for this failure is that for all of the work in the ideologi-
cal sphere, the political sphere has been pretty much ignored—while
the sphere of production is positioned as some kind of afterlife to which
academics have neither interest nor purview. In so doing, composi-
tionists have repeated an “innocence about power” (Berlin, Rhetorics
80) which has consistently plagued composition epistemologies. Yet
when we rethink ideological constructions of authorship through the
ages and institutional enactments of composition that relay current-
traditional epistemology, the spheres of production and politics loom
as terribly neglected elements in the approach to discursive construc-
tions of subjectivity. Surely one solution to this problem is through the
establishment of a political action arm of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication, as Sharon Crowley argues (240).
     One of the effects of the institutional departmentalization of com-
position into English earlier in the century, to recall the argument in
chapter 1, was that the relationship of mentor between professors and
students was severely undermined, since professors now found them-
selves with so many students from outside of their field and the pro-
fessorate was being pushed towards research in the academic rationalist
tradition—that is, publications on their own topics of interest, often
rarified and esoteric—thus limiting energy and time that could be in-
vested in mentoring. As we refashion composition epistemology and
imagine new institutional forms adequate for apprehending the com-
plexities of organizational authorship, certainly we will want to redress
this positioning of professor and students. Probably the identity of
“mentor” will prove inadequate, since student writers (who will of-
ten be simultaneously workplace writers) will be bringing experiences
and expertise into the classroom which will in fact constitute much of
the curriculum—and so we must seek new relationships adequate to
our task.
     We will want to seek new relationships (and alliances) with stu-
dents and professors from other professional classes, too, given that
many of these people are deeply implicated in discourse work, in spe-
cific ways owing in part to their disciplining, in part to the contexts,
and in part to the contours of the classes in formation to which they
belong. Occasions for many other kinds of archaeological digs will
present themselves, and it behooves us to nurture them as they might
enable writers to act in their workplace cultures with greater and
greater sophistication and political savvy. If, with Branden and with
all other discourse workers with whom we explore organizational au-
184   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


thorship we seek to foster a critical relationship with our own dis-
course, we will need to explore relentlessly the ways in which individual
discourses meet with structures and practices in situ. Not to do so is
to succumb to reductionist ideology in our own fields and by extension
in our own lives. When we imagine the becoming spaces that we will
create to mark and loosen discursive limits, we might take one archaeo-
logical shard as talisman, Leigh’s comment that she “always wants
writing to be part of her life” (appendix B), a life, like all of our lives,
that will be increasingly composed by the workplace cultures that writ-
ers write.
APPENDIXES

WORKS CITED
INDEX
Appendix A
RESEARCHERS’ PROFESSIONAL WRITING BACKGROUNDS
Organizational Print Publications (including editors, copy editors,
editorial assistants)
    1993: Bernie, Challie, Itsy, Jan, Kolar, Nancy
    1994: Hart, Jen, Leigh
    1995: Brenda, Daisy, Grace, Helen, Karla, Kelly, May, Phoebe, Tess
    1996: Diane, Holly, Kyle, Nyck, Starla, Sue
    1997: Adam, Chet, Corinne, Lena, Maggie, Mary
    1998: Heather, Jackie
    1999: Anita, Ella, Ginger, Jane, Meg

Public Relations/Policy
    1994: Ann
    1995: May
    1996: Andrew, Ray
    1997: Carolyn, Lena
    1998: Kirsten

Technical Writing/Technical Editing (includes Web site design and writing)
    1993: Ellie, Jeff, Joe, Rex
    1995: Sarah, Tom
    1996: Albert, Norma
    1997: Ana, Carolyn, Chet, Kali
    1999: Adria, Anita, Amy, Joanne, Leathe

Analysis Writing and Correspondence
    1993: George, Lisa, Mandy
    1994: Cass, Hart, Liz, Rachel
    1995: Gloria, Tom
    1996: Andrew, Lois, Starla
    1998: Megan, Ravi
    1999: Leathe

Research Writing
    1993: George
    1995: Gloria, Gwen

Journalism
    1993: Nidean
    1995: Daisy, Karla, Kelly, Marla
    1996: Mack, Red


                                                                             187
188    APPENDIX A

Journalism (continued)
      1997: Carolyn, Maggie
      1998: Jackie

Teaching
      1993: Anne, Lisa
      1994: Lee
      1995: Kelly, Marla
      1996: Alice, Jihad, Kate
      1997: Chet, Elaine, Janice, Julie, Lara

Graphic Design
      1993: Challie
      1997: Mary

Freelance, Self-Employed Writing
      1993: Branden
      1997: Janice

Academic Writing (solely)
      1995: Jillian
      1997: Gary
Appendix B
RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS,
SITES OF RESEARCH, AND RESEARCH TOPICS AND THEMES

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Adam                    Worked as a                 Publishing         “Customer service”;
Editing                 contributing                company            morale; turnover;
                        editor for arts                                isolation, alienation of
                        and entertain-                                 department within
                        ment magazine;                                 company
                        good at inter-
                        viewing and
                        incorporating
                        quotes; good at
                        dialogue; prone
                        to agonizing; uses
                        deadlines; needs
                        practice

Adria                   Creative writing            Military           Socialization, modes of
Technical               undergraduate               contractor         communication, high
writing                 degree; technical                              turnover, visibility of
                        writing career                                 technical writers’ work
                        means learning
                        technical
                        knowledge;
                        enjoys document
                        design, end-user
                        documentation;
                        designs Web
                        pages and
                        corporate
                        literature;
                        agonizes over
                        phrasing, fears
                        sounding stilted;
                        “my academic
                        writing . . .
                        sounds strange”

Albert                  Development in              Government         Virtual workplace and
Technical               high school                 think tank         split subjectivity,
writing,                advanced                                       representations of self,
World Wide              placement                                      writer as go-between,
Web writing             English; influence                             accountability


                                                                                                    189
190    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Albert                  of college pro-
(continued)             fessor; better
                        writing when
                        not nervous
                        about risks;
                        mainly e-mail
                        now; in charge
                        of public image
                        of organization;
                        functional
                        writer—observe,
                        experience, write;
                        humorous
                        narrator

Alice                   Early develop-              Fourth-            Research projects and
Teaching,               ment; journals,             grade              multicultural issues;
academic                storytelling,               classroom          library’s lacunae,
writing                 poetry; writes and                             parents’ books;
                        reads for students                             nonnative speakers and
                        and publicly;                                  literacy roles
                        interest allows
                        immersion;
                        challenge of
                        research

Amy                     “Never thought              Electronics        E-mail communica-
Technical               of myself as a              representa-        tions, shaping cultural
writing                 writer”; writes             tive               norms and values
                        Powerpoint
                        presentations,
                        Web pages, and
                        brochures; enjoys
                        letter writing;
                        “enterprising”;
                        wants to improve
                        as a writer

Ana                     Technical writing           Military           Gender, race, and
Technical writer        for military                contractor         organizational status
                        contracts;                                     and position;
                        woman, minority,                               document review,
                        and non-techie in                              budgets; technical
                        military-industrial                            writer’s knowledge
                        complex (status
                        through English
                        degree); writes
                        fiction in personal
                        life for release,
                        satisfaction,
                        development
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             191

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Andrew                  Career change;              Campus             Formalization of
Policy and              experience in               police             policy, training,
public                  reading and                 department         remodeling of culture,
relations               writing of pro-                                control of information
writing                 gram proposals,
                        procedural
                        initiatives, and
                        speeches, in
                        addition to
                        editing and
                        proofreading;
                        would like to
                        write for an
                        association,
                        public relations;
                        grammar and
                        writing served
                        earlier career
                        (writing as
                        valuable pro-
                        fessional skill)

Anita                   A “writer-in-               Maritime           Meetings and writing
Technical               progress”; handle           office             projects, efficiency,
writing                 topics coherently,                             communications
                        in an organized
                        format; “soup-
                        maker,” present-
                        ing other people’s
                        information;
                        good ear, weak in
                        rules of grammar;
                        fun with words
                        and ideas

Ann                     Not a “writer”              Public             Instruction in writing;
Public                  (“public relations          relations          organizational function
relations               specialist”);               company            of lessons; all women;
writer                  writing equals                                 “feminine”; status;
                        poetry or liter-                               voice, vocabulary
                        ature, “publica-
                        tion”; satisfaction
                        seeing writing in
                        print; two types
                        of writing; pro-
                        fessional: news-
                        letters, press
                        releases, brochure
                        copy (creativity,
                        scrutiny, frus-
                        tration); personal:
                        proposals for
                        nonprofits (satis-
                        fying, purpose,
                        responsibility,
                        pride)
192      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Anne                    Teaching as a               Boys’ prep         Personal/academic
Video-                  profession                  school             writing, gender roles
grapher,                perhaps an error            English class
full-time               (job market);
student                 narrator
                        questions the self-
                        analysis
                        instrument

Bernie                  High school                 Professional       Topics for organiza-
Editor                  writing as                  association        tional publications,
                        expressive outlet;          headquarters       linear and lateral
                        self-satisfying;                               thinking, lobbying
                        more effective
                        form of commu-
                        nication than
                        speech; writing
                        vs. other
                        professions

Branden                 High school                 Government         Documents as
Independent             writing influen-            travel             possessions in
tourism                 tial; equates               agency             bureaucracy
writer                  writing with
                        Shakespeare;
                        published widely;
                        selling her writing

Brenda                  Developed early             Association        Magazine editing and
Press and               (age eleven);                                  review processes, Post-
professional            writing is fiction,                            its, editors’ review
writing                 a certain length;                              styles
                        finds it easy,
                        enjoyable; process
                        involves trans-
                        lating, solving
                        puzzles; some-
                        times humdrum;
                        motivated by
                        deadlines; looks
                        forward to re-
                        sponse; schooling;
                        following a
                        project

Carolyn                 Values essential—           Information        Communication gaps
Technical               must believe in             technology         between departments,
writer,                 document; enjoys            consulting         influence of gaps on
journalism              writing to educate          company            writers’ performance
                        (experience as
                        feature writer);
                        experience in
                        interviewing;
                        currently working
                        collaboratively on
                        a user’s manual
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             193

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Cass                    Excelled in                 Government         Director’s manage-
Contract                research papers in          agency             ment of projects, fax,
writer,                 high school;                                   communications,
government              writing commer-                                government
                        cials for radio;                               hierarchy, employee
                        seven years                                    affect
                        preparing docu-
                        ments for
                        government
                        contracts (coor-
                        dinating requests
                        for proposals;
                        memos, board
                        reports, research
                        ideas); pursuing
                        MA in teaching
                        of writing and
                        literature to teach
                        composition or
                        technical writing
                        eventually

Challie                 More comfort-               Professional       E-mail message
Graphic                 able with creative          association        types, Continuous
designer                than technical              headquarters       Quality Improvement
                        writing; capable                               in organization,
                        yet difficulty                                 efficiency through e-
                        implementing                                   mail, performance
                        ideas

Chet                    Needs improve-              Govern-            Deadlines and
Editing                 ment in writing             ment-related       quality; teamwork,
                        skills; interest/           publishing         cooperation, sacrifice
                        passion for this            company
                        art form;
                        mediocre in
                        nonfiction,
                        poetry, technical
                        writing; have
                        “verbal acuity”;
                        likes writing
                        fiction most, but
                        earning a living?

Corinne                 Difficulty con-             Public             Restructuring and
Editing                 veying emotion as           relations          editing, perpetuating
                        an editor; investi-         office of          image, old produc-
                        gative, artistic,           historic           tion practices
                        organizer; func-            house
                        tional skills:
                        cultivating,
                        problem solving,
                        producing,
                        collaborating,
                        administering,
                        scheduling
194    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Daisy                   Journalism, news            Newsroom           “Live” culture vs.
Journalism,             releases, public            of biweekly        textbook, observed
public                  service announce-                              quietness in the field
relations,              ments, brochures,                              site, experience,
editor                  features; others’                              interactions
                        evaluations of
                        her; enjoyment;
                        writing poetry
                        provides ful-
                        fillment; dead-
                        lines; early
                        development;
                        goal to teach

Diane                   “Conventional               Education          Strategic planning in
Organization            organizer, artistic         association        “disheveled” culture,
publications            creator, social             headquarters       publication processes,
editing                 helper” (Holland);          (communi-          management vs.
                        undergraduate               cations            writers and editors,
                        training in jour-           department)        turnover
                        nalism; perhaps
                        more an editor
                        than writer;
                        satisfaction in
                        effecting results

Elaine                  When writing, a             Corporate          One script’s evolution,
Academic,               good writer (“ele-          history            academic/corporate
newsletters             gant simplicity”);          writing            views of writing,
                        needs audience              company            should/can this com-
                        and deadline,                                  pany do advertising?
                        though (why her
                        novel remains
                        unfinished);
                        juggling mother-
                        hood and writing;
                        great emphasis on
                        page one in com-
                        posing; newslet-
                        ters; emotional
                        high from
                        crafting words

Ella                    Assemble note-              Law office         Managing documenta-
Legal                   books, design                                  tion for outside client:
support                 databases, orga-                               volumes of old docu-
writing                 nize, summarize;                               ments, drudgery, lack
                        no creativity,                                 of autonomy
                        presently; still
                        developing;
                        importance of
                        proofreading;
                        adapted style
                        (shorter sen-
                        tences); creating
                        family Web pages
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             195

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Emma                    High school                 Elementary         Teachers’ and
Teaching                training in                 school             administrators’
                        “notecards and                                 writing; hierarchy,
                        outlines”; later,                              distance, tensions
                        “writer-based”;
                        still later, “audi-
                        ence issues”;
                        not a “gifted”
                        analytical writer,
                        so uses lots of
                        drafts and hard
                        work

Gary                    Early develop-              Internet job       Writing and editing by
Academic                ment (grade                 bank               “non-writers,” new
                        school); enjoys                                issues in writing
                        researching,                                   brought by Internet
                        drafting, and
                        revising; enjoys
                        poetry and
                        creative writing;
                        doesn’t call self
                        writer (“true
                        writers write all
                        the time”);
                        methodical,
                        precise

George                  Childhood                   Military           Ghostwriting,
Writer/editor           writing; high               headquarters       document review
(fourteen               school contest;             organization       procedures, writer
years)                  occupational                                   psychology, readability
                        pleasure is clear
                        and useful
                        writing

Ginger                  Personal writing            Law office         Legal culture,
Legal                   is journals,                                   drudgery, humor,
support                 poetry, letters,                               sarcasm
writing                 e-mails, classes,
                        editing others;
                        professional
                        writing is legal-
                        secretarial,
                        revisions,
                        collaborative,
                        never originated
                        by self; strong in
                        grammar,
                        sentence
                        structure;
                        “pride”; future
                        goal to be editor
                        or technical
                        writer
196    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Gloria                  Innovation, ex-             Library of         Reference correspon-
Professional            perimentation,              Congress           dence, self develop-
writing,                self-motivation                                ment, autonomy,
library                 on the job; auto-                              service, timeliness,
                        nomy, variation;                               styles
                        interdisciplinary;
                        research, self-dis-
                        covery; discipline

Grace                   Developed early             Society’s          Manuscript review
Copy editor,            (age eight); many           journal            policy and procedures,
public rela-            genres; student             publications       culture’s three
tions writer            writing vs.                 office             subcultures, history
                        literary; BA in
                        English; analyzing
                        others’ vs.
                        original work;
                        volunteering;
                        correspondence;
                        promotional
                        copy; editing

Gwen                    Writing requires            Psychiatric        Documentation of and
Medical                 much research;              research           by workers, intrigue,
writer                  writing since               hospital           surveillance, profes-
                        childhood;                                     sional development
                        schooling impor-
                        tant; literature an
                        important influ-
                        ence; family in-
                        fluences; many
                        skills; variety and
                        learning on the
                        job; thorough-
                        ness; patience and
                        understanding
                        required; seeks a
                        contribution to
                        society

Hart                    Hearing an “in-             University         Representing change
Corporate               ternal editor” and          public             and tradition, office
editor, writer          “voice of doom”             relations          status in university
                        while writing;              office             hierarchy, conflicts,
                        comparison with                                writers’ roles
                        Hamlet, The Firm,
                        The Road Less
                        Traveled; humor is
                        a refuge; deadlines
                        as motivation;
                        natural affinity for
                        language; writing
                        self withered while
                        corporate tool;
                        writing is hard
                        work
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             197

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Heather                 Switched from               Association        Writing and editing
Magazine                MA in literature            publications       magazine; isolation of
writing                 to professional             department         staff, physically and
                        writing and                                    culturally
                        editing; practical,
                        realistic, goal
                        oriented, with
                        artistic, creative
                        streak; has dif-
                        ficulty with long
                        papers, lead
                        sentences for
                        news stories;
                        “just starting out
                        as a writer, with
                        room for im-
                        provement”

Helen                   Schooling; job led          Law                Magazine publications
Editing,                her to pursue               enforcement        office, editors’ dif-
organization            professional                training           fering approaches,
magazine                writing and                 facility           implied authorship
                        editing degree;                                of magazine
                        variety; purpose;
                        artistic endeavors

Holly                   Editing while               Newsletter         Decisions and author-
Newsletter              writing, overview           publisher          ity in process, turnover,
writing and             and notes; per-                                management lacunae
editing                 fectionist and
                        organizer, needs
                        clear idea and
                        right conditions;
                        deadline helps;
                        writing and dis-
                        covery; originality
                        and creativity not
                        strong suits;
                        perhaps a better
                        editor than writer

Itsy                    Childhood                   Small              Office dynamics,
Editorial               writing; “struc-            business           newsletters, family
assistant,              tured and uni-              management         metaphor, miscommu-
federal                 maginative                  office             nication
government              writing” in fede-
                        ral government;
                        wants work in
                        publications

Jackie                  Artistic, social,           Association        Publishing bimonthly
News,                   enterprising,               publications       newsletter, staff/“volun-
magazine,               conventional                department         teer” dynamics, “news”
public                  (Holland model);                               role in a public relations
relations               work has fostered                              setting, writing style
writing                 talent in creative                             defined by roles
198      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jackie                  nonfiction, inter-
(continued)             viewing, headline
                        writing, problem
                        solving; future
                        goal: technical
                        writing, pub-
                        lishing, teaching,
                        advertisement
                        copywriting

Jan                     Not a writer, yet;          Professional       Issues management
Editor                  writing as genetic;         association        teams resulted in no
                        literary vs.                headquarters       change in writing
                        professional                                   process, memo use in
                        writing (herself)                              organization,
                                                                       management vs.
                                                                       employees

Jane                    College experi-             City               Red tape, document
Research/               ence in visual              government         cycling; strategically
editing                 arts; “Can I call           agency             missed deadlines
                        myself a writer if
                        I don’t excel at
                        multiple types?”;
                        clinical research
                        associate; ghost-
                        writing; editing
                        children’s book

Janice                  Early develop-              Newsletter/        Business letter in small
Creative                ment; writing as            book               family company, family
freelance               therapy; penchant           fulfillment        conflicts, no second
                        for humor                   company            generation business
                        writing; enjoys                                writers
                        workshops and
                        group processes;
                        enjoys close
                        observation and
                        analysis

Jeff                    Meeting deadlines           Environmen-        Culture clash, technical
Technical               is crucial; good at         tal engineer-      staff vs. editors; status;
editor,                 organizing large            ing con-           expertise and inter-
environmen-             documents;                  sultancy           actions; noun strings
tal engineer-           prefers writing
ing company             humorous essays
                        about people
                        (“male Erma
                        Bombeck”)

Jen                     Two “types” of              Government         Purpose of editorial
Editor,                 writing, personal           employment         pages, office style and
publications            and professional;           newsletter         writing style, all
specialist              personal: journals          publisher          women, feminine
                        (enjoyment,                                    attributes, authority,
                        therapy, relaxed,                              validation
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             199

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jen                     most clear); pro-
(continued)             fessional: job
                        writing and
                        editing (analyti-
                        cal, exacting,
                        “technical-
                        mindedness,”
                        “structured”);
                        writing means
                        expressing self

Jihad                   Identifies purpose          Fast food          Writing forms and
Teaching,               and sticks to it;           headquarters       instructions, implied
business                edits a minimum;            and                readers and voice
memos                   does not revise             franchise
                        ideas; favors
                        uncomplicated
                        language over
                        fancy; as non-
                        native speaker
                        sometimes uses
                        Arabic writing
                        approaches;
                        recent shift to
                        word processing

Jillian                 Satisfaction;               Internet list      Shift in e-“culture”
Academic                solutions to                                   over time, users’ self-
writing                 problems in                                    representation, register
                        others’ writing;
                        exploration;
                        reformulation;
                        academic writing
                        is unfulfilling

Joanne                  BS in technical             Technical          Documenting of tech
Technical/              writing/editing;            contractor         contracting work,
publications            marketing writer                               changes in technology
writing                 in computer                                    and documentation
                        industry;
                        integrating art
                        and text; simple
                        style; analytical,
                        scheduling skills;
                        company news-
                        letter; “social,
                        artistic, enterpris-
                        ing”; social inter-
                        est; collaborative
                        skills; provides
                        financial security

Joe                     Technical writing           Software           Corporate style
Documen-                is a challenge;             development        manual, representa-
tation                  diplomacy and               company            tion, users, audience
specialist              negotiating;
200    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Joe                     rewarding;
(continued)             creator, problem
                        solver (writer
                        working on
                        programmer’s
                        product)

Julie                   Lots of reading             Community          Work writing influence
Teaching,               and thinking                college            on school; perceived
community               about conven-               classroom          applications, similari-
college                 tions (academic                                ties, value
                        and business);
                        composed a com-
                        puter manual;
                        experience in
                        industry and
                        many written
                        genres of
                        workplace

Kali                    Easily adapts               Military           Job insecurity and
Information             styles; uses                contracting        writing quality, self-
and analysis            investigative and           company            imposed standards,
writing                 conventional                                   planning departures
                        skills for work
                        writing (mostly
                        factual tables and
                        charts); uses
                        speech-pattern
                        sentences for
                        personal and
                        informal writing;
                        artistic, social,
                        enterprising

Karla                   Artistic skills;            Association        Newsletter production,
Journalism,             schooling;                  publications       editorial board’s
pubs                    newsmagazine                division           intervention, corporate
                        writing; free-                                 politics
                        lancing; fulfill-
                        ment; narratives
                        of changing jobs,
                        validation; goal is
                        to write fiction

Kate                    “Solid” writer—             University         Tutor styles, writing
Teaching,               others’ estima-             writing            center services, English
academic                tion; precision,            center             department culture/
writing                 readability,                                   writing center culture
                        thoroughness, yet
                        lacking spark; not
                        a “creative”
                        writer (humilia-
                        tion); more
                        comfortable in
                        third person than
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             201

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Kate                    first, would like
(continued)             to meld first
                        person and third
                        in this course

Kelly                   Teaching compo-             University         Changes in publications
Copy editor/            sition; freelancing;        publications       process to “teams”;
writer,                 journalism; pub-            department         time, pressure; different
publications            lications; variety                             participants’ viewpoints
                        and volume of
                        work; creative
                        writing interest;
                        “painful”

Kirsten                 Influence of                Association        Publishing monthly
Magazines,              college instruc-            magazine           magazine, work ethic,
public                  tion by magazine            publications       standards, collabora-
relations               writer; interviews          division           tive and solo work
writing                 and research lead
                        the writing;
                        nonprofit writing
                        to raise public
                        awareness; future
                        goal: marketing
                        or public
                        relations writing

Kolar                   No assessment               U.S. senator’s Hill culture, press
Editorial               provided                    office         office writing, fabri-
assistant,                                                         cation, socialization
public
relations

Kyle                    Practice and                Association        Magazine publication,
Writing and             perfection (edit-           communica-         turnover, publication
editing,                ing association             tions de-          processes and
organization            magazine); edit-            partment           creativity
magazine                ing others; devel-
                        oping style (easy
                        to read, clear,
                        concise); true love
                        is humor (D.
                        Barry); e-mails a
                        favorite place to
                        write—not
                        literary or poetic,
                        but fun and
                        understandable

Lara                    Working with                Elementary         Composing school
Teaching,               kindergartners;             school             plan collaboratively;
kindergarten            artistic theme                                 difficulties, poor
                        strong in Holland                              management of
                        model; difficulty                              collaborative writing
                        in expression at
                        times; write funny
202    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lara                    letters, emotional
(continued)             poetry, deter-
                        mined letters to
                        Congress

Leathe                  Working                     Research           Culture of a “flat
Technical/              independently,              and                organization”; chain of
report                  analyzes, con-              technical          command; project
writing                 ceptualizes, and            development        cycling, iterations
                        organizes infor-            company
                        mation; creates
                        tables; writes data
                        up without the-
                        orizing; dislikes
                        proposals, prizes
                        “time flexibility”;
                        likes data analysis

Lee                     Writing to learn,           Writing            Tutoring vs. computer
Teacher,                writing and                 center             lab, evaluating soft-
writing                 reading; writing                               ware, organizational
center                  to explain, pro-                               location and conflict
director                vide information
                        at work; journal
                        for exploring,
                        examining
                        feelings; notes,
                        letters, and lists in
                        “everyday life”;
                        lacks discipline;
                        revises a lot; play-
                        ing with words

Leigh                   Professional                U.S. cabinet  writing processes,
Editor,                 writing means               speechwriters writer’s references,
government              editing other                             “idea factory”,
                        people’s writing,                         metaphors, civil
                        style to govern-                          servant vs. political
                        ment standards;
                        memos are
                        “structured
                        writing” (a for-
                        matting technique)
                        (persuasive memo
                        to boss got money
                        for graduate
                        school); academic
                        writing includes
                        hypertext fiction,
                        a struggle and is
                        revealing about
                        self as writer
                        (vulnerability,
                        flow, catharsis);
                        writing always
                        part of life
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             203

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lena                    Enjoys language,            Nonprofit          Management style,
Teaching,               “putting it to-             educational        editors’ decisions on
high school             gether”; “scaled-           publications       manuscripts, career
                        back ambitions”             company            advancement for
                        (great novels,                                 writers means moving
                        MFA vs. MA in                                  into management
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing); likes to
                        observe, describe,
                        draw conclusions

Lisa                    Understanding               Bank               Style: marketing and
Analyst,                through writing;                               prestige; commercial
English as a            writing as means;                              loan vs. operations;
second                  writing and inves-                             family symbolism;
language                tigative skills; non-                          gender, conflict, morale
teacher                 native speakers in
                        American work
                        culture

Liz                     BA in French;               World Bank         Writing style, editors’
Staff                   MA underway to              editors            work, organizational
assistant               expand profes-                                 division’s status, sup-
                        sional scope,                                  port staff/professional
                        improve writing                                staff
                        skills; difficulty
                        with long docu-
                        ments; strengths:
                        creativity and
                        variety of style,
                        persuasive
                        writing; uses
                        e-mail extensively

Lois                    Career change;              Telecommu-         Face-to-face and
Marketing,              striving to                 nications          virtual cultures, top-
organization            improve skills;             company’s          down vs. bottom-up
memos                   writer is a                 virtual office
                        “reverse prism”;
                        “stories demand-
                        ing to be told” (a
                        narrative of
                        writer as vehicle);
                        trying to find
                        own voice

Mack                    Not a writer: not           Personal           Writers’ aims and
Journalism              paid or regular;            ’zines             backgrounds, anti-
                        enjoy researching                              school, who are the
                        more than writing;                             audiences
                        deadlines help;
                        newspaper
                        experience pro-
                        duced “journal-
                        ese” and enhanced
204    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Mack                    understanding of
(continued)             writing process;
                        telling stories to
                        teach and delight;
                        miss thrill of
                        news writing

Maggie                  Good at con-                Publications       Standards, author-
Journalism              veying facts;               company            editor-colleague
                        never writes                                   exchanges, technology
                        about self;                                    of virtual publishing
                        succinct; likes to                             processes, auto-
                        use quotes; editor                             didacticism
                        (very different
                        from writing);
                        personal writing
                        friendly, familiar,
                        unrestricted; lost
                        some creativity

Mandy                   Not yet a writer            Industry           Waste in document
Secretary               (must “produce”),           association        publishing and distri-
                        so “aspiring”               headquarters       bution; sexism, racism
                        writer; African-
                        American woman;
                        attending school
                        and working at
                        two jobs currently

Marla                   Academic and                Secondary          Communications in
Journalism,             journalism                  school             school; administration,
academic                primarily; BA                                  teachers, students,
writing                 French/English;                                parents and informa-
                        graduate courses                               tion flow
                        for credentials;
                        teaching, coun-
                        seling, creating,
                        relating; com-
                        munity ties

Mary                    Editor of college           Management         Elitism, mentoring,
Editor,                 undergraduate               consultancy        perks, turnover, (non-?)
graphics,               paper; published                               hierarchy, stress,
freelance               freelance essayist;                            deadlines
                        suspense novel in
                        circulation; jour-
                        nal keeping with
                        illustrations;
                        would like to
                        write and illus-
                        trate children’s
                        books
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             205

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


May                     Schooling                   Hospital           Public relations
Public                  developed skills                               writing, agendas of
relations/              and interest;                                  different divisions
marketing               journalism;
writing                 interviewing;
                        corporate writing;
                        education to en-
                        hance and rectify

Meg                     Business writing            Global             Monthly program/
Marketing               conveys concise             information        activity report,
writing/                messages; manag-            company            managing/controlling
editing                 ing content for                                work expectations
                        fourteen Web
                        sites; writer/editor
                        for two internal
                        publications;
                        corporate public
                        policy and gov-
                        ernment mark-
                        eting writing; e-
                        mails, faxes,
                        letters; intimi-
                        dated by creative
                        writing

Megan                   Influence of                University         By-laws, direct mail,
Academic/               parents and                 foundation         memoranda of
fund-raising            teachers while              office             understanding,
                        young; eleventh                                acknowledgements,
                        grade: art of                                  vagueness in discourse,
                        sentence                                       personal yet universal
                        structure; college                             appeals
                        major in creative
                        writing; under-
                        taking MA in
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing to sharpen
                        skills

Nancy                   Nancy: developed            Educational        Collaborative
(editorial              early (age six);            facility           document process,
assistant)              writing as per-             planning           proposals, family roles
and Ellie               sonal; sense of             company
(technical              inferiority; must
writer)                 be interested in
                        topic
                        Ellie: direct, clear,
                        logical; writing is
                        a puzzle; hopes
                        for a varied
                        writing career
206    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Nidean                  “Never boring,”             Fitness            Language use to
Journalist;             even if matter is           training           manipulate, brochures,
full-time               dry; “chameleon             facility           notions of self, gym
student                 penner”; writing                               discourse
                        ability helps in all
                        professions

Norma                   Late bloomer,               Doctor’s           Coded entries on
Technical               early anxiety,              office             patients, time, industry
writing and             stress, punish-                                standards
editing                 ment; worked
                        hard at this dif-
                        ficult skill; inter-
                        rupted college;
                        enjoys tech
                        writing most;
                        updating and
                        revising text-
                        books;would like
                        to use ethnogra-
                        phy to develop
                        freer style

Nyck                    Currently stag-             Capitol Hill       Formalizing culture
News and                nant, needs a               info provider      through writing,
information             deadline or a                                  responsibilities and
editing                 demander; gets                                 pay, credentials and
                        ideas for stories,                             professional identity
                        poems, screen-
                        plays, but doesn’t
                        write them down;
                        dreamed of writ-
                        ing since fourth
                        grade; may use
                        writing as ther-
                        apy; adopts voice
                        of humorous
                        narrator in the
                        self-assessment

Phoebe                  Ethnography will            Writers’           Interoffice correspon-
Professional            be “confessional”           organization       dence, artists as
writing,                (Van Maanen’s                                  managers, alliances in
business,               categories); MFA                               culture, upheaval
poetry                  vs. MA in
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing; poetry;
                        “doing every-
                        thing” in office
                        writing; writing
                        as therapeutic;
                        schooling;
                        newfound passion
                        for editing
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             207

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Rachel                  Early employ-               Embassy            Reports, letters; author
Foreign                 ment; artistic              defense            credit; military
language                skills and writing;         section            structure and writing;
assistant               “knack” for                                    gender divisions
                        technical writing,
                        business writing;
                        tenacity, auto-
                        didactic; long-
                        term goal: write
                        full time

Ravi                    Taking pride in             Software           “Unconventional”
Academic/               one’s work; the             development        office management,
freelance               thrill of being             company            training, collaboration,
                        published; getting                             work dynamics
                        a paycheck; has
                        written two plays,
                        many poems,
                        travel notes and
                        essays; rereads his
                        work

Ray                     Creative and                Small town         Revising policy, oral vs
Policy and              fiction on own              police             written culture, orga-
public                  time—desires                department         nizational dynamics,
relations               more time for                                  writer as “shield” for
writing                 “independent,                                  chief
                        introspective, and
                        nonconformist”
                        writing; at work:
                        press summaries,
                        press releases,
                        memos, letters;
                        perhaps too self-
                        critical; similar
                        technical writing
                        in future?

Red                     “Descriptive                Daily              Journalist culture and
Journalism              writer,” visual             newspaper          professional develop-
                        thinker (mother a                              ment, management vs.
                        painter);                                      reporters, “trust,”
                        newspaper                                      surveillance
                        experience:
                        writing approach-
                        ing spoken style
                        and now reads as
                        a writer; writing
                        is an art, for
                        fulfillment;
                        rhythm and
                        rhyme are
                        therapeutic
208    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Rex                     Writing is artistic;        Illustrations      “Boundaries,” phys-
Editor,                 enjoy team                  department,        ical, social, linguistic;
technical               atmosphere yet              national           captioning; veterans vs.
writer                  independent;                monthly            novices; management
                        seeking new job                                vs. employees

Sarah                   Enjoyment; inter-           Freelancers        Project acquisition and
Technical               est; writing to                                management in current
writing,                learn; intellectual                            economy, isolation,
academic                stimulation;                                   interactions with
                        social contact                                 editors and others
                        (through inter-
                        views); organiz-
                        ing; ordering;
                        variety of tasks;
                        deciding whether
                        to switch to
                        freelancing

Starla                  Prefer nonfiction           Financial          Organizational
Public                  to fiction, humor           services           hierarchies; press
relations,              (Dave Barry);               company            releases; problems in
news                    enjoys writing              communica-         information flow,
analysis                profiles; work              tions              review processes
                        (other people               department
                        edit) vs. home
                        (freer); “audio”
                        writer (sentences
                        and musicality)

Sue                     Earlier days,               Military           Review and dissemina-
Organiza-               enjoyed writing             field office       tion system, office
tion editing            for writing; now,                              alliances, breakdowns
and writing             job requires much                              in dissemination
                        writing in formats
                        and “govern-
                        mentese”; others’
                        opinions are a
                        plus; lack dis-
                        cipline; moody;
                        writer’s block;
                        deadlines are a
                        plus, private
                        writing suffers;
                        writing as therapy

Tess                    Publications;               Travel             Corporate culture and
Writer/                 enjoyment; many             business           writers’ cultures,
editor,                 tasks; learning                                association vs. cor-
organization            skills on the job;                             porate writing, inter-
publications            creative writing,                              viewing for new job
                        poetry; convic-
                        tion; “painful”;
                        wants to find her
                        professional
                        culture
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             209

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Tom                     Developed early             Community          Memos’ form and
Professional/           (age four); wants           college            function; organization
technical               and fears feed-             senate             structure and power
writing                 back; comfort,
                        loss, invasion;
                        people who
                        influence; giving
                        power; finds
                        academic writing
                        esoteric; narrator
                        uses metaphor
                        and irony
Appendix C
WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF
THE ORGANIZATION
PRIVATE BUSINESSES AND CORPORATIONS

Size*    Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


L        Adam              Compiling health care       Writers and editors in
                           reference materials         either publishing divi-
                                                       sion or operations
                                                       division

M        Adria             Composing and               Technical writer
                           updating software life      [researcher], a Web site
                           cycle documentation,        developer, in thirty-
                           corporate literature,       person headquarters of
                           Web site copy               defense contracting
                                                       organization, coordi-
                                                       nating virtual teams
                                                       around the country

L        Amy               Composing e-mails to        Sales representatives in
                           customers and               five-person office
                           coworkers                   coordinating requests
                                                       and information from
                                                       fifteen other offices

S        Ann               Public relations writing    Owner (founder), pro-
                                                       ject coordinator, editor,
                                                       graphics specialist

M        Carolyn           Composing software          Technical writers in
                           documentation               documentation and
                                                       training team

S        Chet              Producing publications      Owner (founder),
                           on government               editor, attorney, assis-
                           procurement                 tant editor/production
                                                       manager, printer

S        Daisy             Interviewing, writing       Associate publisher,
                           copy, editing               editors (managing,
                                                       feature, sports, copy),
                                                       reporters


*S = less than 15 employees; M = 15 to 100 employees; L = more than 100 employees

                                                                                            211
212    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented    Writers’ Positions in Organization


M         Elaine       Writing corporate          Historians: CEO,
                       histories                  archivists, project
                                                  managers, writers

L         Ella         Composing interoffice      Legal assistant
                       memos, client letters,     [researcher] of
                       document charts, file      attorneys in eight-
                       indexes, tables of         person team, 500-
                       contents                   person firm

M         Gary         Composing and              Marketing executive,
                       updating Web site          webmaster, technical
                                                  writer

L         Ginger       Composing form             Secretaries [researcher],
                       agreements, memos,         legal assistants of
                       and letters                attorneys in firm of
                                                  over a hundred

M         Holly        Editing newsletters        Editor in editorial
                                                  department of twenty,
                                                  newsletter publications
                                                  company

S         Janice       Getting clients,           Owner (CEO), sec-
                       promoting their            retary, public relations
                       publications               writer, marketing
                                                  writer, printer

L         Jeff         Editing engineers’ copy,   Technical editor in
                       proposals                  team of seven,
                                                  engineering organiza-
                                                  tion of over a hundred

M         Jen          Writing, editing,          Writers, editors, and
                       proofing copy              editorial assistants in
                                                  biweekly newsletter

M         Jihad        Writing memos and          Managers and
                       business forms             employees from other
                                                  professions

M         Joanne       Composing manuals          Documentation
                       and on-line Web page,      manager of staff
                       migration plans,           [researcher] in six-
                       drafting on shared         person team of fifty-
                       drive                      person organization

L         Joe          Writing software docu-     Technical writers in
                       mentation; editing copy    team of four, part of
                       from other departments     software development
                                                  organization of 150
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             213

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


M      Leathe            Composing proposals         Technical writer/editor
                         and statistical analysis,   [researcher - one of
                         Web sites                   four] in eighty-person
                                                     government contractor

M      Lisa              Writing memos and           Vice presidents, loan
                         correspondence              administrators, oper-
                                                     ations assistant, assis-
                                                     tant managers, cus-
                                                     tomer service assistant

L      Lois              Writing memos and           Salesperson in virtual
                         e-mails up and down         office of eight, part of
                         organization to             communications
                         coordinate marketing        technology organiza-
                                                     tion of over 300,000

S      Mack              Self-publishing ’zine       Independent (links with
                         issues                      other writers via ’zine
                                                     culture)

M      Maggie            Assembling books for        Sponsoring editor,
                         publication by e-mail       managing editor,
                                                     project editor

L      Mary              Team writing manage-        Specialists, managers,
                         ment studies                associates, analysts (all
                                                     MBAs)

L      May               Writing promotional         Assistant vice presi-
                         brochures                   dent, marketing and
                                                     public relations,
                                                     hospital of over a
                                                     hundred [researcher]

L      Meg               Writing internal and        Vice president, director,
                         external reports,           senior manager
                         newsletters, Web sites      [researcher], informa-
                                                     tion associate in 250-
                                                     person office of
                                                     16,000-person
                                                     information company

S      Nancy             Coordinating propos-        Technical writer/pro-
       and               als, boilerplating          gram analyst; liaison to
       Ellie                                         exterior (clients) in
                                                     five-person architec-
                                                     tural consultancy
                                                     organization

S      Nidean            Desktop publishing          Outside consultant
                         consulting
214    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented   Writers’ Positions in Organization


S         Norma        Documenting patients      Professionals in other
                       in office                 professions

M         Nyck         Scanning and proofing     Reporters, editors,
                       transcripts of govern-    chief editor, and mana-
                       ment documents,           gers in sixty-five-per-
                       putting them on-line      son on-line news and
                                                 information provider

M         Ravi         Marketing software        Marketing writers,
                       and telecommunica-        technical writers, sales
                       tions service             writers

M         Red          Reporting for and         Managing editor, edi-
                       publishing newspaper      torial editor, copy and
                                                 bureau chiefs, copy
                                                 editors

M         Rex          Indexing and abstract-    Indexers in illustrations
                       ing illustrations         division of national
                                                 monthly publications
                                                 office

S         Sarah        Self-marketing own        Niches: outside writers
                       writing and revising      (selling their content)
                       and composing             and consultants
                       organizations’            (working with
                       publications              organization’s content)

L         Starla       Clipping news articles,   Communications
                       writing press releases,   specialists, PR director
                       newsletter                in seven-person com-
                                                 munications division,
                                                 organization of over a
                                                 thousand

L         Tess         Writing newsletter,       Writer in communica-
                       public relations,         tions department in
                       brochures                 travel company of
                                                 2,300


GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS

L         Albert       Managing Web pages,       Technical writer/
                       composing copy, man-      webmaster in 850-
                       aging e-mail and voice    employee government
                       mail in virtual office    think tank

M         Ana          Writing technical         Technical writer,
                       specifications,           communications
                       proposals, status         automation officer in
                       updates                   operations department
                                                 of information
                                                 technology division
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             215

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


L      Anita             Drafting, circulating,      Technical writer con-
                         and editing short- and      sultant [researcher] to
                         long-term projects;         maritime headquarters;
                         presenting progress in      military personnel at
                         meetings                    various ranks in ten-
                                                     person division

L      Branden           Collectively writing        Outside consultant
                         reports and press           [researcher] to policy
                         releases for public,        and planning office in
                         composing internal          travel agency in
                         weekly reports, editing     department of
                         and copyediting             commerce; staff writers
                                                     in policy and planning

L      Cass              Composing requests for      Contracting officer
                         proposals based on          [researcher] in 250-
                         input from many             person government
                         divisions                   agency on arms control
                                                     and disarmament

L      George            Gathering data,             Program analysts and
                         analyzing it, writing in    writers in military
                         chop chain for officers’    headquarters organiza-
                         signatures                  tion of 400

L      Gloria            Researching sources         Reference librarians in
                         and synthesizing them       newspaper and current
                         for library patrons via     periodicals reading
                         letters and e-mail          room of Library of
                                                     Congress

L      Gwen              Writing grant applica-      Branch chief, writer/
                         tions, administrative       editor [researcher], and
                         renewals, memos,            secretaries in branch
                         purchase orders,            chief’s office overseeing
                         articles and books,         twenty-nine-member
                         statements, audio-          staff
                         visual presentations

L      Helen             Editing submissions         Editors and associate
                         from the field for a        editors in seven-person
                         law enforcement             publications division of
                         organization’s              national law enforce-
                         magazine                    ment organization

M      Jane              Composing and editing       Supervisor and editor
                         monthly reports,            [researcher] in two-
                         newsletters, magazine       person public affairs
                         articles, Web site copy,    division of fifty-person
                         letters to citizens         city government agency

L      Kali              Writing reports,            Direct-charge and over-
                         financial analysis,         head employees in vari-
                         technical specifications,   ous divisions of military
                         computer tips               contracting company
216    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented    Writers’ Positions in Organization


M         Kolar        Ghostwriting state-        Press secretaries and
                       ments, fabricating let-    assistants in U.S.
                       ters from constituents     senator’s press office

M         Leigh        Speechwriting for U.S.     Civil servant speech-
                       cabinet member             writers in cabinet
                                                  office, team of five

L         Liz          Producing collective       Report authors and
                       reports for external       editors (on-staff and
                       audiences, editing and     contractual) from
                       revising copy from         various divisions of
                       other divisions, writing   World Bank staff of
                       internal memos             9,500

M         Rachel       Composing wire reports     Civilian and military
                       and written reports for    employees in twenty-
                       superiors’ signatures,     four-member defense
                       composing internal         attaché section of a
                       memos and assignments      foreign embassy

M         Ray          Writing public relations   Policy writer in support
                       copy to exterior, policy   division of small-town
                       revision within            police force
                       organization

M         Sue          Processing and editing     Reports officer in gov-
                       reports, checking forms    ernment/military field
                       and formats                office of twenty-five


PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS AND SOCIETIES

M         Bernie       Producing four journals    Authors (outside and
                       to keep constituency       on-staff) and editors
                       abreast of issues          (support staff in
                       (writing and editing)      publications depart-
                                                  ment) in association
                                                  headquarters

M         Brenda       Evaluating submis-         Director of publications,
                       sions, accepting,          assistant director of
                       editing, and publishing    publications, and writer/
                       articles for bimonthly     editor in three-person
                       magazine                   publications branch of
                                                  communications
                                                  department of associa-
                                                  tion headquarters

L         Challie      Publishing monthly         Writers and editors,
                       newsletter and e-mail      graphics expert
                       exchanges in organiza-     [researcher], in 160-
                       tion                       person association
                                                  headquarters
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             217

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


S      Corinne           Composing public            Director, marketing
                         relations materials for     director, managers
                         historic house              (special events,
                                                     education, interpreta-
                                                     tion, media relations),
                                                     administrative
                                                     assistants, contract
                                                     editor [researcher]

M      Diane             Writing, editing books,     Writers, editors, and
                         desktop publishing,         editorial assistants in
                         proofing; composing         five-person communi-
                         public relations            cations department of
                         brochures and reports       twenty-person asso-
                         to constituents             ciation headquarters

M      Grace             Coordinating manu-          Manuscript coordina-
                         scripts from authors        tor, editor in “adjunct
                         and referee reviews in      journal staff,” team of
                         professional society’s      eight associate editors
                         monthly journal,            and editor-in-chief
                         editing and copyediting

L      Heather           Publishing monthly          Editor-in-chief,
                         magazine                    assistant editors,
                                                     managing editor, senior
                                                     editors, copy editors,
                                                     editorial assistants

S      Itsy              Producing newsletters       Two writers, each in
                         for constituents            charge of separate
                                                     newsletter, in five-
                                                     person office of
                                                     association

L      Jackie            Publishing newsletter       Editor-in-chief,
                         for national association    managing editor,
                                                     associate editors,
                                                     editorial assistant,
                                                     photo assistant

M      Jan               Collectively producing      Senior staff and
                         perspective paper to        support in eighty-five-
                         represent constituency      person association
                         to Congress                 headquarters

M      Karla             Publishing newsletter       Editorial board,
                         for national association    managers, project
                                                     directors, writers,
                                                     editors, copy editors,
                                                     editorial assistants in
                                                     media relations depart-
                                                     ment of association
                                                     headquarters
218    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


S         Kirsten      Publishing magazine         Senior vice president
                       for national association    in communication,
                                                   publications director,
                                                   editors-in-chief,
                                                   managing editors, in
                                                   magazine staff of six,
                                                   part of publications
                                                   staff of seventeen

M         Kyle         Writing stories, coor-      Editor in seven-person
                       dinating and editing        communications
                       submissions from            department of thirty-
                       nonpaid authors, for        five-person association
                       association bimonthly       headquarters
                       magazine

S         Lena         Publishing monthly          Editor, managing
                       magazine for science        editor, associate editor,
                       educators                   design manager,
                                                   editorial assistant,
                                                   field editor

L         Mandy        Boilerplating, speech-      Managers and staff
                       writing, composing          support in ninety-
                       reports to constituents     person association
                                                   headquarters


EDUCATIONAL AND NON-PROFIT INSTITUTIONS

M         Alice        Teaching report and         Full-time teacher in
                       research writing to         fourth-grade classroom
                       fourth graders              in public school system

L         Andrew       Composing training          Professionals in other
                       policies and lessons,       professions, part of
                       standard operating          university campus
                       procedures                  police office

M         Anne         Teaching writing in         Student-teacher in tenth
                       high school sophomore       grade English class in
                       English                     boys’ prep school

M         Emma         Writing administrative      Principal, secretaries,
                       notes, memos, news-         teachers, support staff
                       letters; writing notes to   in elementary school
                       parents

L         Hart         Writing copy for            Editor of magazine,
                       alumni magazine,            director of publica-
                       special reports,            tions, publications
                       president’s statements      assistant and desktop
                       and other publications      assistant in the com-
                       in university relations     munications depart-
                       office                      ment of university
                                                   relations department
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION              219

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented      Writers’ Positions in Organization


L      Jillian           Posting comments in          Mostly academics at
                         MBU, a public listserv       various institutions in
                         on the Internet              United States and world-
                                                      wide, in various positions

M      Julie             Composing literary           Students anticipating
                         analysis, research           majors in business, art,
                         papers, response jour-       sociology
                         nals in community col-
                         lege composition class

L      Kate              Teaching writing one-        MFA students with
                         on-one, conducting           teaching assistantships
                         group workshops in           in English department
                         university writing           with tracks in literature,
                         center                       linguistics, professional
                                                      writing and editing, and
                                                      teaching writing and
                                                      literature

L      Kelly             Writing copy and             Director of publica-
                         editing others’ in           tions, production
                         variety of publications      manager, writers,
                         in university publica-       editors, copy editors,
                         tions office                 and editorial assistants
                                                      in fifteen-person office

M      Lara              Collectively composing       Principal, lead teachers
                         an elementary school         (in subject areas), read-
                         three-year plan              ing teacher, kindergar-
                         mandated by county           ten teacher [researcher]

M      Lee               Writing memos on             Director of a writing
                         daily activities, reports    center attached to
                         to central administra-       English department in
                         tion of college              community college

L      Marla             Teaching journalism,         Full-time teacher in
                         writing to parents,          public high school of
                         overseeing school            1,100
                         newspaper production

M      Megan             Writing by-laws, mem-        Annual fund director,
                         oranda of understand-        director of develop-
                         ing, biannual newsletter;    ment for donor
                         direct mail solicitations;   relations
                         acknowledgments

M      Phoebe            Composing memos and          Office manager and
                         reports on office            assistant in administra-
                         business for internal        tive division and pro-
                         distribution                 grams coordinator in
                                                      program division of
                                                      non-profit organization
                                                      serving writers, teach-
                                                      ers, and community
220    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented   Writers’ Positions in Organization


L         Tom          Writing memos and         Chair of college senate,
                       reports                   community college
Appendix D
RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF
WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES

ADAM—A LESSON IN THE DANGERS OF WORKPLACE ALIENATION

A valuable illustration for employees attempting to understand the dynamics of
their workplace cultures is a corporate environment that has undergone a diffi-
cult period of growth resulting in a dangerous level of alienation from others by
one or several departments within the organization. This autoethnographic study
provides the history and goals of a publishing company, documents several sources
of the company’s difficulties, and concentrates on the detachment of one depart-
ment, customer service, during this troublesome time. It is the author’s conten-
tion that conditions at the company compounded the feeling of alienation felt by
his department. Additionally, conditions inherent in all customer service situa-
tions as well as attitudes maintained by employees of this particular department
are discussed to illustrate that fault should be equally accepted by those employ-
ees and the company environment as a whole. Concluding observations provide
an insight to the future of the company and how its improving conditions could
be attained at similar organizations.
ADRIA—SOCIALIZATION, ACCEPTANCE, EMPLOYEE TURNOVER, AND WRITING IN
A SMALL DEFENSE CONTRACTING ORGANIZATION

This paper centers on the author’s autoethnographic research at a small defense
contracting organization in which employee turnover has become so bad that it
is practically a joke. The paper focuses on the relationships between employee
turnover, socialization, and writing tasks. Employees at this company learn quickly
that socialization plays a big part in employee happiness and ability to get work
done. Gossip and actual information sharing become entwined, so that a short
office visit for talking about the new employee down the hall can become a valu-
able source of information. Besides oral communication, written communication
in the form of e-mail is the most valuable source of information, but it often falls
short if those involved in the e-mail conversation have never met in person. Turn-
over itself has made a case for the need for more documentation, since so many
people leave that important information becomes lost. Finally, speculations are
made concerning the relationship between management and employees, and
opinions are expressed concerning the problem of turnover.

ALBERT—SPLIT SUBJECTIVITY IN THE VIRTUAL WORKPLACE

This study investigates the role of the professional writer in a government think
tank. The two goals of this study were to assess the “virtual “ environment in
this workplace through exploring the split subjectivity of the writers there and

                                                                                221
222   APPENDIX D

to address the dynamic nature of documents (specifically resumes) on the World
Wide Web. My findings focus on the virtual buffers now a part of the hiring and
firing process of employees, and on the psychologies of composing in the virtual
writing environment. This study incorporates the writings of three postmodern
theorists, Charles Altieri, Terry Eagleton, and Morris Dickstein, to support the
ideas of split subjectivity, virtual discourse, and the mediated values writers and
readers bring to authorship.

ALICE—USING THE WRITING PROCESS TO ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY:
AN ETHNOGRAPHIC INSIGHT TO CLASSROOM CULTURE
This paper presents the findings from a classroom study that provided insights
on the impact of the writing process on accommodating diversity and ability. The
setting of the study is a fourth- and fifth-grade classroom in an urban elementary
school. Students, parents, teachers, and administrators were interviewed and
observed in the school setting and the results were described in field notes and
written responses. Analysis of data revealed three significant points: (1) Students
come from varied writing experiences that can have different values than their
school experiences; (2) Students need to see themselves in the curriculum; (3) The
writers’ workshop format functions as a powerful tool for students to express
what is important to them.

AMY—THE CULTURE OF BEA, PORTRAYED AND DEFINED BY E-MAIL
This study is an illustration of the culture of a branch office of an electronics sales
representative. Using interoffice e-mails and organizational charts completed by
each member of the five person office, the autoethnographer contrasts the team-
oriented atmosphere perceived by office members versus the hierarchical struc-
ture of the office defined by corporate headquarters. The e-mails collected were
categorized into five categories as follows: employee conversation (nonwork re-
lated), manager to subordinate instructions, comments to the office on outsid-
ers’ e-mails, and copies of e-mails sent to outsiders to keep everyone up to date.
These e-mails were used to define the culture as team-oriented and were viewed
using a sociolinguistic analysis. At the same time, the e-mails were contrasted
against the culture defined in the organizational charts, which did not portray a
flat organization. The author’s analysis determined that there was a team spirit,
but the office was still divided with managers and subordinates.

ANA—RACE, STATUS, AND WRITING CYCLING AT A MILITARY CONTRACTING FIRM
My experience as a technical writer at “D3 Corporation” allowed me to study
the history of contracting and document review in tandem with hiring and fir-
ing. As money from one contract dwindled, employees in the lower echelons were
let go (including one critical technical support person), while an expensive middle-
manager was brought on, ostensibly for his power to land new contracts. By the
time that four of the six minority workers in the company had been let go, my
boss and I, the remaining two minority workers, felt some security—he because
he had a strong track record in bringing in business and I because I was in fact
the only one actually learning the technical intricacies of our projects through
my writing. Towards the end of this study, upper management had begun cycling
our documents to the new middle manager so that he could sign off on them and
take money from our budget. At the conclusion of my study, my boss and I were
interviewing for new jobs.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    223

ANDREW—DEVELOPING A TRAINING CURRICULUM AND REMODELING THE
INFORMATION FLOW: ONE ORGANIZATION’S APPROACH TO CHANGE
The Atlantic College Campus Security Police has changed the way it trains its
officers and the way it disseminates policy and procedures to the line officers.
This ethnography examines those changes, focusing on the training program that
is presently in place, contrasting it to the previous arrangement. The paper also
looks at the way in which directives are prepared within the organization as a
vehicle to compare the director’s leadership style to his goals and objectives for
the organization. This work unit is, in some respects, a makeshift organization,
carving and creating its culture as it goes. It has not looked at itself for the pur-
pose of determining the value of the changes undertaken by its new director but
instead relies on its intuition and experience to map its future.

ANITA—CONSTRUCTING COMMUNICATION
During the months of February through May 1999, I have been observing the
maritime military division where I have been employed for three years. The data
used for this ethnography include two sets of interviews with each division mem-
ber, minutes from weekly division meetings, personal observations as both a
participant and ethnographer, and incorporation of readings about ethnography
research. I have studied how the nine members in my division communicate with
each other about work issues. The theme that has arisen most dramatically is the
lack of efficiency and ability to concisely explain projects to one another. The
major focus of this ethnography—based on members’ concerns during the first
interviews—centers on weekly meetings held by the division; two other types of
division meetings are included for comparison and contrast. Initial findings show
that the weekly division meetings do provide a good opportunity for members to
share their project information, but the structure of the meetings as they currently
operate lacks the positive structure needed to enhance productivity.

ANN—EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW YOUR BOSS WILL TEACH YOU
This ethnography outlines the learning processes relative to writing as intertwined
with learning processes relative to business success in a small metropolitan pub-
lic relations firm. The ethnographer, also a subject of this study, examines a va-
riety of writing samples and the manner in which lessons are presented as osten-
sibly limited to writing style. In addition to determining some of the acculturation
purposes behind the lessons, the ethnographer attempts to address the spirit in
which the lessons are received. Through both conversation with the authors and
interpretation of the written lessons, conclusions are drawn as to the success or
failure of the specific instructions and instructor.

ANNE—PREP SCHOOL BOYS WRITE: CULTURE IN CONTEXT
As one of only a handful of women on the campus of the Wilson School for Boys,
a prep school serving Washington’s elite, I used my student-teaching experience
as subject for my ethnography. In particular, I focused on the kinds of writing
and teaching practices for boys in Form III (ninth grade). Their regular teacher,
Mr. Peters, was also a coach in several sports and drew upon his contact with the
boys in this other venue to prompt their engagement in English through such
classroom techniques as “paragraph wars,” in which boys competed for the best
paragraphs. My attempt to introduce journal writing was unsuccessful, which
224   APPENDIX D

within the context of this larger ethnographic study I attribute to three factors:
the journals seemed less “masculine” than the argumentative thesis writing of most
other assignments; when the time necessary to complete them was weighed against
the time necessary for school tasks deemed more central, the latter took priority;
my status as student teacher, compounded by my gender in this all-male environ-
ment, did not lend weight to these journals. Treating the journals as both stu-
dent assignment and data for my own writing enabled me to assess this “failure”
with greater perspective.

BERNIE—TRIAL ATTORNEY WRITERS: ALL FACTS, NO FICTION
The researcher, an editor at an attorney’s association engaged in lobbying Con-
gress, studied the formats for reports written for four of the association’s jour-
nals. These reports regularly followed the same recipes, with individual writers’
slants on the issues made clear at times through selected quotes from interviewees.
In addition, manuscripts prepared by trial attorneys regularly displayed a step-
by-step, linear arguing process (just as these attorneys in interviews described a
step-by-step composing process), whereas manuscripts submitted by transactional
lawyers (engaged in contract and corporate law) showed evidence of more lat-
eral thinking.

BRANDEN—DISCURSIVE ELITISM IN A GOVERNMENT TRAVEL AGENCY
As a participant observer in a government travel agency striving to become an
influential voice both domestically and abroad in the tourism industry, I studied
two documents—a booklet and a weekly report—as well as the writing of them
to understand their significance in this local culture. My analysis draws heavily
on organizational psychology, as a result of both Edgar Schein’s readings for the
class and the degree to which Schein’s thought had influenced my principle in-
formant, Diane, third in command in policy at the agency. In particular, organi-
zational maneuvers among high-level players are interpreted in light of the past,
present, and future orientations of the organization. The booklet I studied, now
a year old, stood emblematic of past orientations of the agency for many, against
which to measure subtly their differences. The weekly report to the secretary of
commerce had a futurist orientation, elaborated by Diane but which incidentally
allowed certain players to hold other members to projected roles in the organi-
zation, all the while elaborating their own.

BRENDA—THE MANUSCRIPT REVIEW PROCESS AT SCHOOL LEADER MAGAZINE:
AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF POST-IT NOTES
This ethnography examines the manuscript review process of a bimonthly maga-
zine published by a national, nonprofit association of school principals. The first
section of the paper describes the unusual review process—which involves three
editors and which takes place entirely on three-inch-square yellow Post-it notes—
and gives the reader background information on the association, the magazine,
the editors themselves, and the workplace setting. Later sections explore the con-
tent and scope of the reviews, workplace undercurrents present in the notes, and
the gaps the Post-its fill in the absence of staff meetings, professional feedback,
and other forms of communication. The paper also addresses the criteria editors
use to rate manuscripts, and whether or not these criteria are sufficiently com-
municated to prospective authors. The ethnography ends with several recommen-
dations for improvement based on the findings of the study.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   225

CAROLYN—THE LAST TO KNOW: A TECHNICAL WRITER’S ETHNOGRAPHY
OF A SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

This ethnography focuses on the flow of information on a large software devel-
opment project at a technology consulting firm. I took notes during staff meet-
ings and conducted in-depth interviews with members of the three subcultures
working on the project—the Testing, Development, and Documentation and Train-
ing teams—and examined numerous artifacts from each group. I demonstrate how
these subcultures discover and disseminate information about the software among
themselves and with others on the project. I uncover gaps in this communication
and demonstrate that members of the Documentation and Training teams are
excluded from the information sharing process and are the last to learn about
important developments and updates. As a technical writer on the project, I be-
came strongly positioned as a member of the subculture most affected by this
ineffective communication. This study raises questions about why the gaps in
information sharing occur, how they affect employees’ morale and work, and what
action could be taken to open the channels of communication.

CASS—MANAGING INFORMATION, MANAGING PROJECTS, MANAGING AFFECT

This ethnographic study focuses on the management style of a supervisor for an
information management office in a small government agency. It outlines his
career, describes his management style, and uses interviews with colleagues to
examine how he motivates and finesses both his employees and those outside of
his office using various tools and techniques (both verbal and written) to man-
age projects. By examining this facet of the workplace culture, the author attempts
to correlate well-known and respected management styles with this man’s appar-
ently successful style. In particular, his humorous demonizing of bureaucratic
processes via comments and drawings with his staff creates a “we’re all in this
together” aura that masks subtle manipulations.

CHALLIE—ELECTRONIC MAIL COMMUNICATIONS AS TRAITS OF A
CORPORATE CULTURE
This two-month-long study of electronic mail in an association workplace began
because the researcher (myself), a new employee and a Macintosh user, had lim-
ited access to e-mail. A survey was developed and given to approximately one-
third of the staff; recipients proportionately reflected the hierarchical divisions
on staff. In addition to the surveys, the author saved the 253 e-mail messages she
received over the two-month period. Because survey results showed dramatic
differences in private message use among departments, the author focused on all-
staff messages: ones sent to everyone in the organization. Most of the all-staff
messages were general internal information that was not urgent. The next most
frequent category was externally related FYI. Further analysis discusses the types
of messages sent by each staff level. Series of messages on the same topic—called
“strings” in this paper but commonly known as “threads”—were also studied.
Analysis of the message threads and usage patterns led the author to recommend
changes in the work processes at the study site, such as increasing the number of
incoming fax machines, making a much-referenced paper listing of addresses an
electronic copy only, and updating software training procedures.

CHET—JUST DO IT . . . NOW! AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF A SMALL PUBLISHER
This ethnography is the study of the writing culture at Quill, Inc., a small-staffed
226   APPENDIX D

publications house in Tysons Corner, Virginia. I began this study with the intent
of determining how a writing and editing staff of five persons could successfully
produce a relatively large amount of material under strict deadlines. Because this
is also an autoethnography, I wanted to confine my observations and findings to
precise and accurate work habits and behavior, independent of personal knowl-
edge about this particular process. What I discovered almost immediately after
beginning to record field notes, was that that approach would not be practical
or constructive. My findings show responsive attitudes, teamwork, and talent to
be the cogs of Quill’s production machine under deadlines, the factor that most
prompts good, clear editing and writing. The culture is as unique as the person-
alities of its inhabitants; Quill’s functional writing process is dependent on five
individuals performing as a collective whole.

CORINNE—A MOUNT VERNON ETHNOGRAPHY
The Programs Department of Mount Vernon is responsible for all public percep-
tion of Mount Vernon. My ethnography focused on how their writing reflects
that mission, and how the “presence” of George Washington influences the work
that they produce, notably in its various reflections of civility. The lack of cohe-
siveness as a department, which I observed while working as an outside contrac-
tor, could be attributed to the individual nature of members’ approach to projects.
My ethnography makes some observations and suggestions to improve the pro-
cess, specifically the creation of a production/publication department with a for-
malized procedure for approving, supervising, reviewing, and editing projects.

DAISY—BEHIND THE BYLINES: LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE JOURNALISTS
AT A SMALL WEEKLY NEWSPAPER

This study, conducted over an eleven-week period, describes the newsroom work
environment and the journalists employed at a small, twice-weekly newspaper.
There are eight primary informants in different writing and supervisory positions
at the paper. The journalists provide their thoughts and opinions on writing prefer-
ences and styles, give advice to prospective journalists, explain their training to enter
the profession, discuss future aspirations, and describe what it takes to be suc-
cessful as a print reporter. The experiences of these reporters are also compared
to those of the author, who was a journalist for several years, and to those of other
professionals. It is hoped that this study can serve as a teaching tool for journal-
ism instructors at the secondary and postsecondary level. For journalism students,
it can serve as an in-depth guide to some of the realities of newspaper journalism.

DIANE—STRATEGIC PLANNING AND THE PUBLICATION PROCESS:
ATTEMPTING TO DISCURSIVELY ORDER A DISHEVELED CULTURE
“NCHE,” a medium-sized higher education association, located in the same
building as more than twenty other higher education associations, has been in-
volved in intense strategic planning during the last year. The focus of this plan-
ning has been not only to reorganize the publication strategy and procedures of
the association’s national office, but to develop a strategic plan to serve as a di-
rection for the association as it approaches its centennial. This study focuses on
the plan’s impact on the staff, management, and association as a whole, with
particular attention paid to the plan’s effect on the publication process and how
the writing and editing of the association is being “directed” by the document.
However, instead of providing order to the association, especially an ordered
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     227

connection between the association’s management and its employees, the plan-
ning has instead emphasized the great schism between the management and the
staff. By focusing on the impact of the plan, including the perceptions and per-
spectives of those affected, this study provides a glimpse of a culture comprised
of discontented staff with an extremely high turnover rate and a management team
unaware of the downwardly spiraling morale, trying to provide order and focus
in a top-down, discursive strategic plan.

ELAINE—AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF A HISTORY WRITING COMPANY

In this ethnography, I examine the development of a fifteen-minute film (entitled
“How the World Knows the Sterling Company”), produced by the History Place,
a company that writes corporate histories. The video recounts the one-hundred-
year history of advertising of a paper company. As I studied the culture and the
writing of this workplace, I interviewed the writers and the chief executive of-
ficer, and I read the corporate history on which the script is based. The final script
(and film) is vastly different from the first draft—it differs in length and tone and
has gone from an academic study to a light-hearted advertising piece. In this paper
I describe the history of this video, and report on the changes in the company
which came about as a result of the controversies surrounding the script.

ELLA—DISSATISFIED LEGAL PROFESSIONALS: IS IT A LACK OF
SUBSTANTIVE WRITING ASSIGNMENTS?
This is an honest portrayal of law firm life. This ethnography found that the
majority of writing conducted within this litigation group of a large Washing-
ton, D.C., law firm is nonlegal. The group acts as national coordinating counsel
for a large chemical company’s asbestos premises litigation and works together
with a team from the client company’s legal department. This pairing offers a study
in the aspects of client-attorney relationships when the client is an unwilling team
member. The ethnography concludes that little substantive writing combined with
poor client relations cause a growing number of legal professionals to become
dissatisfied with their chosen careers.

EMMA—LIFE AMONG THE LITTLE PEOPLE: AN ELEMENTARY ETHNOGRAPHY
I studied the correspondence and writing practices of the faculty and staff of an
area elementary school. The staff consists of 58 staff members including the prin-
cipal, 3 secretaries, 12 resource and specialist teachers, 22 classroom teachers,
and various other support staff. Through analysis of notes, memoranda, news-
letters, and rhetorical notes on students’ work, I observed how teachers’ jobs and
time constraints affected the kinds of writing they produced. I discovered that
shorter, off-the-cuff forms of writing were prevalent in an environment where free
time is scarce. The study suggests that the forms of writing, like the place from
which they originate, are primarily educational in nature. Both handwritten and
computer-generated forms of writing were analyzed for the ways in which they
seemed to establish (or reduce) distance between writers and readers.

GARY—SNAPSHOT OF AN INTERNET BUSINESS: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
This ethnography describes the local culture of an Internet-based job recruitment
company and how the department in charge of one of the company’s products, a
site on the World Wide Web, approaches writing. The ethnography describes the
228   APPENDIX D

physical environment, the products and services the company provides, the people
that I worked with, the actual work that I did at the company, and the writing
process involved with that work. While I make no broad conclusions about writing
in an Internet-based business, some of the more unusual aspects of the industry
are described. Issues of authorship, audience, and nontraditional writers are all
subjects of observation, particularly as rhetorical decisions are made in this fast-
paced authoring environment. These concerns may become more prevalent in
workplace writing in the future as this industry grows.

GEORGE—FOR SOMEONE ELSE’S SIGNATURE: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
OF WRITING IN A MILITARY ORGANIZATION
This study examines the processes, products, and effects of writing, specifically
ghostwriting, in the culture of one military headquarters organization. Ghostwrit-
ing, or writing for someone else’s signature, is inherent in military cultures be-
cause of their authoritarian, hierarchical structures: Only those with proper au-
thority may sign official documents although the signers often do not write the
documents. Conducted using standard ethnographic techniques, the study illus-
trates how such research methodologies offer a structured framework for study-
ing the writing done within a culture. The use of ethnographic techniques requires
“triangulating” findings to draw conclusions that are substantiated by balanced
data. Data collection methods used in the study include personal interviews,
questionnaires, document analysis, and read-aloud protocols (to test ghostwrit-
ers’ intents and readers’ interpretations.) The study explores readers’ responses
to the texts to assess the effectiveness of the ghostwriting process in helping the
members of the organization meet their goals. The readers’ responses also pro-
vide an assessment of the efficiency of the organization’s ghostwriting processes—
from writing, revision, and signing to reading. Recommendations are provided
on how this military organization’s management might (1) help writers and revi-
sors improve their writing processes to make reading more efficient (and the
ghostwriting process as a whole more effective), (2) help revisors and signers
improve the document review process to cut out wasted time, effort, and psycho-
logical pain, and (3) institute a new regime for signing that would allow author-
ity to be shared more widely throughout the hierarchy.

GINGER—ETHNOGRAPHY OF STANLEY TROUT
This ethnography focuses on what role humor plays in the workplace, specifi-
cally in a law firm. The study of humor reflects back on that of the legal discourse
in which the participant works and what it means for the employees who work
there. There are many different ways of relating to impersonalizing legal discourse
and humor is demonstrated to be one effective method. Different kinds of hu-
mor within the workplace are studied and demonstrated. It is also discussed how
humor is used as a tool within legal discourse and for whom it actually works,
the employee or the employer. Humor is studied as a much larger element within
the workplace than would be thought at first glance.

GLORIA—DISTRIBUTING THE NATION’S “CHAMPAGNE”: REFERENCE
CORRESPONDENCE IN THE NEWSPAPER AND CURRENT PERIODICAL
READING ROOM AS A REFLECTION OF LIBRARY MISSION AND CULTURE
This study investigates letter correspondence provided by reference staff in a read-
ing room of the Library of Congress, the Newspaper and Current Periodical
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    229

Reading Room of the Serial and Government Publications Division. The tangible
and intangible nature of correspondence is explored as a representation of the
reference culture in the Library of Congress. Within this division, reference corres-
pondence serves multiple purposes: as a representation of the library to the pub-
lic, an educational tool for librarians, and as evidence of reference philosophy
and practice. The implied authors of letters written in response to requests for
research thus take on significance as singular representations of the library, even
though frequently these letters are composed by several different researchers over
the course of correspondence.

GRACE—EVOLUTION OF A FLAGSHIP PUBLICATION IN A PROFESSIONAL
MEMBER SOCIETY: ORIGINS AND EXPLORATION
The researcher occupied the position of manuscript coordinator at the American
Society for the Mapping Sciences, whose members come from government, in-
dustry, and the academy. Submissions for publication thus come from three very
diverse sectors, and the manuscript coordinator was often confused by reviews
that seemed to lack standard policies and guidelines, particularly concerning the
academics. As part of her study of this local culture, she interviewed editors and
directors of publications and engaged in participant-observation at the society’s
annual convention. She also conducted archival research on the history of the
society and the evolution of its flagship publication, the Journal of Mapping Sci-
ences. She discovered submission and review practices that had evolved as the
field evolved and as the relationships among the three principal constituencies
evolved—the government and industrial sector having shaped the field initially
and the academic sector having enjoyed a more recent rise to prominence. The
recent reviews of manuscripts that requested resubmission after revision (rather
than flat rejection) came to make sense as a part of a knowledge-production pro-
cess vital to academic writing.

GWEN—DOCUMENTATION IN THE WORKPLACE: HOW INTRIGUE
CAN BECOME A PART OF DAILY LIFE

This study was conducted in the schizophrenia research branch of a federally
funded psychiatric research hospital. The original goal of this study was to ob-
serve the conflict caused by impending personnel layoffs and their impact on office
personnel as well as on office dynamics. It was found that, either as part of their
daily routine or in response to the impending layoffs, four out of the five office
members (including the author) keep some form of documentation on either their
own actions or the actions of others for personal protection or career advance-
ment. All of this documentation is largely being conducted without the knowl-
edge of the other office staff. This hidden subculture was found to affect inter-
personal relationships, office dynamics, and career advancement. Documentation
was only one aspect of this subculture which, due to its concealed nature, is called
“intrigue” throughout the paper. The reasons for documentation are discussed,
and suggestions are offered for resolving some of the conflict and disparity be-
tween documenters.

HART—SEEKING THE FUTURE, RESPECTING THE PAST:
COMMUNICATIONS AT MIDATLANTIC UNIVERSITY
The researcher conducted on-site observations and interviews with members of
the communications office at Midatlantic University, with a focus on some of the
230   APPENDIX D

publications produced by the office: the alumni magazine, special reports, and
recruiting publications. Writers in the department cover regular “beats,” which
supply material for regularly issued press releases. The most challenging aspect
of these assignments and those that contribute to the publications cited include
articulating simultaneously a support of time-honored traditions on this sleepy
southern campus as well as a forward-looking spirit that will attract students.
Document analysis reveals recurrent tropes such as “aspiration” that reflect this
dual appeal and frequent interplays between photos of campus red-brick colo-
nial architecture and text that projects the environment represented by this pe-
riod architecture into the future.

HEATHER—THE ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION: AN ETHNOGRAPHY

After moving its entire office from New York to Reston, Virginia, the Engineer-
ing Association had to hire a completely new staff. Problems existed in transi-
tion planning and a new staff was thrust into a foreign environment with little to
no leadership. Instead of being inducted into an existing culture, the new employ-
ees were left to establish a culture on their own while learning a new job. This
lack of existing culture created a disjointed staff where employees acted as indi-
viduals rather than as a cohesive team. A lack of social interaction pervaded the
professional atmosphere as well, and editors rarely consulted with each other for
opinions and suggestions. The result of this lack of interaction is an inefficient
production cycle that fosters misunderstandings and resentment.

HELEN—EDITING: CHANGING TEXTS AND IMPLIED AUTHORS
I examined the types of interventions made by editors of a professional govern-
ment magazine and how those interventions altered the implied authorship of the
texts edited. I explored four types of interventions: factual text additions, cre-
ative text additions, rewriting, and text deletion. I found that the changes made
enhanced the image of the implied author by adding the editors’ expertise in
written communication to the authors’ expertise in the subject matter, thus cre-
ating an implied author who possessed both. Representing the authors in this way
benefits the readers, the authors, the magazine, the magazine’s sponsoring agency,
and others.

HOLLY—THE WORKPLACE: FINDING YOURSELF IN THE PROCESS
As an MA student in English and a professional editor for three years, I took a
personal perspective with this ethnography. In the course of the study, I lost the
position which was my site and got a new job. I began to see this project as an
opportunity to reflect on my experiences and education before moving forward;
my undergraduate alma mater’s alumnae magazine therefore fits as my publish-
ing site. My study is an examination of how people fit into an editorial process.
In particular, I focus on professional identity in authoring procedures marked by
high turnover in personnel and gross discrepancies between work performed and
wages garnered.

ITSY—ARC: AN ETHNOGRAPHY ON SMALL BUSINESS

The researcher studied ARC, Inc., a small business that manages two associations
serving communicators and librarians. Parallels were drawn between the physi-
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   231

cal setting (a restored townhouse in Alexandria, Virginia) and the staff dynamics
in this family-sized business consisting of a director, two staff members/writers,
and the graphics specialist (whose office was located in the basement). Based on
interviews and observations, the researcher concluded that a sense of family drove
a commitment to excellent performance in addition to professional commitments.

JACKIE—REMEMBER THE MEMBER: STAFF-VOLUNTEER
COLLABORATION IN WRITING FOR AN ASSOCIATION

This autoethnography centers on my work as an editor at a large trade organiza-
tion, where I work with other staff writers/editors and association members who
volunteer their time to produce periodicals and other publications. The Associa-
tion for Engineering, where I have worked for one and a half years, emphasizes
the importance of staff-volunteer relations. This theme—prevalent among all
aspects of the association’s projects, not just communications—poses unique ques-
tions about the management of corporate writing. With my background and
experience in journalism and public relations, I find my current role unique in
that it is often a reporter’s job in an in-house and external public relations set-
ting. The sometimes complementary and sometimes clashing interests between
the reporting/PR aspects create unique management and member relations issues
in terms of planning, job responsibility and accountability, delegation of duties,
and editorial review. This work should be of interest and use to anyone interested
in the writing process in a workplace setting, including organizational psycholo-
gists, professional writers and editors, educators, association managers, and others
who follow communications trends. On a more pragmatic note, this paper could
especially benefit people who work (or want to work) in corporate communica-
tions, particularly for an association.

JAN—NEW ISSUE MANAGEMENT AT UMP: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
As a part-time consultant to the insurance association where I had worked full-
time for the past six years before being laid off recently, I conducted ethnographic
inquiry into a new topic driving reorganization in the local culture: issue man-
agement. The association had just changed issue management practices from
“functional” to “issue specific,” and I used field notes and interviews, along with
text analysis of memos on certain issues, to ascertain differences in organizational
treatment of these issues. What this research revealed is that the personalities and
dynamics among them were so entrenched in this culture that new structures sug-
gested for issues management fell by the wayside; in the end, dominion established
and maintained by particular players as part of their political maneuvering still
drove issues management.

JANE—SELECTIVELY HONORING DEADLINES

Meeting deadlines can be detrimental to the success of documentation. In one
government office, the ability or inability to meet deadlines seemed to correlate
with the document’s general significance, the authority of its intended reader, and
the professional condition and attitude of its author. Although all documenta-
tion had to pass through a complex review process, items with a high-authority
audience traveled through this process more rapidly. The perceived value of a
document was also determined by the authority of the individual or department
who initiated work on the assignment. If the production of a document were
232   APPENDIX D

peripheral to an employee’s main function, he or she might allow the project to
languish and, eventually, perish. Deadlines also were missed as a result of indi-
vidual tendencies to flout the review process. In such cases, the intent may have
been to meet deadlines by forgoing lengthy review systems, but such oversight
did not go unnoticed and, in the end, only exacerbated delays. In some cases of
missed deadlines, no time frames had ever been clearly laid out for document pro-
duction. The provision of specific deadlines to writers, reviewers, and editors could
alleviate some issues of tardiness.

JANICE—FAMILY BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS:
THE DYING ART OF THE BUSINESS LETTER

I studied professional writing in a Washington, D.C., area family-owned and
-operated turnkey fulfillment business that is about to pass to second generation
control. Using recorded observations and interviews and writing samples includ-
ing both the CEO’s client correspondence and the second generation partners’
form letter drafts, I recorded this business’s dilemma as the CEO nears the last
stages of terminal cancer. Of particular note in this study is the fact that none of
the young partners have ever written any business letters geared toward client
acquisition, and, to date, they only communicate with existing clients via e-mail
and telephone. As a result, one added feature of this ethnography is my position
as observer/activist, a nontraditional ethnographic role. In this capacity I proposed
collaborative writing to the partners as one option to explore for the future.

JEFF—TECHNICAL EDITING: ADVENTURES IN CULTURE CLASH
People with technical and scientific backgrounds—civil engineers, for example—
tend to exhibit a distinctive workplace writing style. They are fond of passive voice
and agentless sentences (“The landfill liner was examined”). They nominalize,
or “smother,” their verbs (“an evaluation was performed”). They create long
strings of modifiers (“the raw influent soluble phosphorus concentration”). Use
of such constructions often makes meanings unclear, but it also serves to identify
the author as a member of a professional culture and as a technical expert. The
editor’s attempt to assert his own expert status by decoding dense text and break-
ing up long modifier strings often is seen as an assault on the engineer’s identity
as a technical expert.

JEN—OFFICE STYLE AND WRITING STYLE IN A
BIWEEKLY SUBSCRIPTION NEWSLETTER
This ethnography traces the history of JS, a biweekly subscription newsletter
serving government employees and those seeking employment with the govern-
ment. The study traces the history of this privately owned, twenty-two-person
organization within an organizational psychology framework, in particular as
“myths and legends” prevail, much of them related to the company founder and
current president. Against this background, the study focuses on the selection and
management of office decor as it becomes more regulated and controlled as one
descends the organizational hierarchy. Parallels are drawn with latitude in prose
style—as it is extended to those on the upper organization and withheld from those
at lower editorial levels. The style of the editorial pages in this job announcement
bulletin reflects this latitude and is analyzed here as “solicitous,” appealing in
particular to higher-end readers following trends in employment and thus occu-
pying a similar professional class with that of company directors.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   233

JIHAD—WRITE AN ESSAY, SELL FRIED CHICKEN

Ethnographic research on workplace writing explores new venues for writing
instruction. My ethnographic study of writing in a fast food franchise entails the
analysis of writing as it relates to the theory and practice of management and com-
munication in this culture. Furthermore, I narratologically analyze the writing of
certain individuals to shed some light on the formation of rhetorical positions and
voices in this workplace. The study reveals that rhetorical discourse is contained
within social and situational positions in the workplace. Moreover, the study
results offer new insights to the teaching of writing in the classroom, particularly
as writers’ available positions are configured within genres such as the memo.

JILLIAN—FRAMING REALITY: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
OF AN ELECTRONIC COMMUNITY
This ethnography draws on Erving Goffman’s frame analysis and posits that elec-
tronic communities constitute one of the “multiple realities” described in his book.
These communities should therefore be viewed “nonjudgementally” by the eth-
nographer, who should, as David Fetterman says, “suspend disbelief.” The pa-
per then goes on to describe Megabyte University, a list devoted computers and
writing, of which the researcher is a member. Self-representations of members who
post comments are discussed, using the qualified signatures of these members.
The shift in membership over the years is discussed as a reflection of evolving
approaches to list membership taken by people interested in composition and
writing and active nationally in real and virtual discussions of scholarly life.

JOANNE—ETHNOGRAPHY OF A DOCUMENT
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: A PROCESS OF CHANGE

A student ethnographer examines a documentation development project at a
government contractor site, including the extensive changes in the project and
the technology that had an impact on it. The original project had tightly defined
requirements. After a year, the document standards, schedule, and delivery pro-
cedure had changed. The company involved, the student’s employer, was a small
disadvantaged business headquartered in a suburb of Washington, D.C. The doc-
umentation project required hiring new staff. The documentation team was then
organized into a highly hierarchical organization. Persons at different levels of
the hierarchy saw different factors as significant in the project. Communication
among the various groups involved in the project required use of the Internet, e-
mail, and local area network capabilities in addition to meetings and individual
discussions, and was a key factor in developing the documentation. Preparation
of the documentation schedule illustrates the planning, production, configura-
tion management, and quality assurance involved in the project. The results of
the study indicate that major technology innovations, new coding procedures, and
the federal government’s emphasis on providing useful products and services were
instrumental in causing changes to the original plans.

JOE—THE CASE OF THE MISGUIDED STYLE MANUAL:
A STUDY OF CORPORATE WRITING AND REPRESENTATION
This study explores the corporate writing culture at Acme, Inc., a software de-
velopment firm. To better update an old corporate style manual, an ethnographic
study of the writers and writing styles at Acme was started to learn what types of
234   APPENDIX D

written materials employees produced and where they felt they needed help with
their writing. During the study, however, the author noticed a lopsided (mis)rep-
resentation of the views of management versus the views of nonmanagement
employees. In an effort to find out why a group of employees was misrepresented,
this study-turned-mystery looks at the differences of the responses to surveys and
questions answered by the two groups.
JULIE—THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LOCAL CULTURES
AND THE TEMPERAMENT OF STUDENT WRITING

This study explored the nature of the relationship that exists between various local
cultures and student writing and found that a symbiotic relationship, as varied
as the students and their cultures, exists between the two. The study focused on
a second semester freshman composition class at a local community college. Data
were also collected from various other student sources including a local business-
man who is a part-time student and an art student attending an art and design
school. Specifically, the study found that students do not carve their lives into
separate spheres. There is overlapping between the various domains of students’
lives in the following ways: students tend to transfer knowledge and skills from
their work to their classroom writing, and their way of seeing and thinking about
writing is heavily influenced by the disciplines they are studying. Several sugges-
tions for ways to apply the research findings to teaching are included. These are
a brief sketch of a plan to combine volunteerism and college writing, a suggestion
that team teaching of block courses be encouraged, and a recommendation that
schools need to offer more computer-based writing classes.
KALI—SINK OR SWIM: HOW EMPLOYEES STAY
AFLOAT IN A NAVY CONTRACTING COMPANY
The Navy contracting industry is volatile, unpredictable, and offers little job se-
curity or recognition to its employees, which could affect the quality of their
writing. None of the participants in this study agreed absolutely on the exact
correlation between lack of job security and quality of writing, but all of the
employees had an internal work ethic that stimulated them to work hard for
personal satisfaction. This study gives a brief explanation of the ever shifting Navy
contracting business, gives short biographies of the participants, and then dis-
cusses how the individuals perceive the effects of minimal job security on the
quality of their writing.
KARLA—WRITING UP THE CORPORATE LADDER: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC
EXAMINATION OF COMMUNICATIONS AT THE COSMETIC
MANUFACTURERS AND RETAILERS ASSOCIATION
The purpose of this ethnography is to examine the impact of association infra-
structure on internal communications between staff members and its effect on
the association’s external publications. The subject of study is the Cosmetic Man-
ufacturers and Retailers Association’s newsletter, Snapshots, and the activities of
its editorial board. Class structure is a very important aspect of the culture of the
association. The members of the editorial board subscribe to the tenet that infor-
mation flows through CMRA from the top down. The members of the editorial
board belong to a high-ranking level of staff within the association. It is at the
top that the messages of the association are developed. The writers and editors
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     235

are merely the conduits for moving the information out from CMRA to the mem-
bers of the association, Congress, and the media. This ethnography considers how
this phenomenon of circumventing creativity and voice affects the process of writ-
ing and editing in the association. All names (including the name of the associa-
tion and any mention of its members) have been changed.

KATE—STRANGER IN A FAMILIAR LAND: A WRITING TEACHER’S
ETHNOGRAPHY OF A UNIVERSITY WRITING CENTER
I observed tutoring sessions, workshops, staff meetings, and e-mail interchanges
of the writing center of a local state university. The staff includes a full-time di-
rector, two full-time assistants (graduate students), a full-time instructor, and six
part-time tutors (graduate students). The majority of tutorials are with under-
graduate ESL students. Observations of tutorials revealed an array of interesting
approaches for discussing writing with students, yet little expertise in actually
teaching ESL students to become better writers. Nearly all of the tutors were
graduate students in the MFA track, supported through this work-study arrange-
ment; many of them were surprised to learn that the MA track in the teaching of
writing and literature, in which I was completing my degree, existed. The study
raises questions about staffing positions in the center, in light of expertise, career
aims of graduate students, and needs of the writing center’s clientele.

KELLY—REVISING A PUBLICATION’S PRODUCTION PROCESS:
EXAMINING THE TEAM CONCEPT

This study narrates the roles and responsibilities of a creative team, including
writers, editors, graphic designers, and production/business managers, in produc-
ing informational and promotional material for a public university. Through a
description of the work site, a description of the typical process of producing these
documents from start to finish, interviews of participants, and an analysis of team
concepts in business and publications settings, this ethnography uncovers some
of the successes and difficulties of implementing Total Quality Management prin-
ciples in a small publications environment. It also offers the participants’ sugges-
tions for continuous process improvement.

KIRSTEN—A DAY IN THE LIFE OF ASSOCIATION MAGAZINE STAFF

The life of a writer isn’t necessarily a solitary process. Today writers work in en-
vironments which force them to interact, make choices, and face challenges—all
for the publication of a quality product. In this study, I have tried to capture a
“snapshot” of the typical work day of an association magazine staff in order to
identify the duties and choices which one would not immediately associate with
a writer. Included are observations on the use of e-mail to compose regular col-
umns, conveying publications processes to other departments in order to garner
information from them more effectively, scheduling feature stories well in advance,
and review of bluelines, and meeting agendas. This “Day in the Life” compila-
tion dovetails with findings on collaborative writing by researchers such as Janis
Forman, Lisa Ede and Andrea Lunsford, and Cynthia Selfe; it will educate stu-
dents who are considering a career as a writer. With a look at the typical day of
an association magazine writer, students will be in a better position to determine
if writing in an association is the career for them.
236   APPENDIX D

KOLAR—WRITING IN A U.S. SENATOR’S PRESS OFFICE

This ethnography follows several months in the career of a high-profile senator
as he seeks reelection, written from my perspective as an assistant to the assis-
tant deputy press secretary. It acknowledges the senator’s savvy at garnering re-
sources for and attention to his constituents, as well as findings by the Senate
Ethics Committee that he has “conducted the business of his office in an improper
and inappropriate manner.” This business takes place among the “Tribes on the
Hill” described by ethnographer Jack Weatherford, in which the new arrivals in
Washington are socialized into the machinations of national government politics.
As illustration of this socialization, this ethnography offers one writing practice
in the senator’s press office, regular fabrication of letters from constituents in
response to a political opponent’s faux pas, intended to bolster the senator’s
political position as a spokesperson for this constituency.

KYLE—PRODUCING COMMON GROUND MAGAZINE

This ethnography follows the production of the May/June issue of Common
Ground, a magazine published by a nonprofit association in Alexandria, Virginia,
and characterized by high turnover in staff. Historical background on the asso-
ciation is presented, including a shift in 1991 from a newsletter serving constitu-
ents to a full-blown magazine, along with the emergence in 1993 of the magazine’s
guiding philosophy of “service journalism.” The researcher, who is also editor
and sole full-time staffer of the magazine, retraces the scrambling to meet the
deadline, which included frequent faxes and voice mail messages to contributing
(unpaid) authors. He also enumerates his responsibilities, which include assign-
ing and editing feature articles and departments, coordinating staff proofread-
ing assignments, producing the annual editorial calendar, and working with the
art director to develop design and art ideas. His own writing processes for the
cover story are retraced, from the original idea (newspaper clips from Florida),
through meetings with the art director, through revising of headlines and layouts,
through drafts of the article evolving through plays on words, to the final issue.
The work culture is interpreted as one that the editor can use to stoke the cre-
ative process.

LARA—THE IMPACT OF WRITING A SCHOOL PLAN
I observed collaborative writing efforts and the process of writing a school plan
in an elementary school. Most of the staff are well established while the princi-
pal is fairly new to the school and to writing a school plan. (Plans are composed
anew every three years.) Tensions between teachers, differing philosophies among
the staff, and outside community influences impacted the writing of the school
plan. Observations revealed that the school plan, in theory, has an enormous effect
on the philosophy and direction of the school. However, in practice, at this par-
ticular culture, the school plan’s impact is minimal at best and negative at worst,
due to inadequate structuring of the collaborative writing sessions that resulted
in affective conflict rather than substantive debate.

LEATHE—THE CULTURE OF A GOVERNMENT CONTRACTOR
The business culture at a northern Virginia company is examined through the
announcement of a move, a description of the company’s current building and
offices, the dress code, employee access to the building and offices, and use of
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     237

the paging system. The company’s staff is described in terms of job titles, educa-
tion levels, and number of foreign-born. Company documents are cited to estab-
lish how the staff is organized in task teams. Some of the ways the business cul-
ture affects teamwork are examined through a brief study of a Web site task team.

LEE—TECHNOLOGY IN THE COLLEGE WRITING CENTER: FINDING THE BALANCE
The researcher studied the use of educational software and the teaching of word
processing as they enhanced students’ writing skills in the writing center at
Pleasantview Community College. This study was situated in an institutional con-
text that had witnessed a recent relocation of the writing center from the English
Department to the Campus Learning Resource Center and a decline in one-to-
one conferences as computer-aided individualized instruction rose. Using partici-
pant observation (the researcher was the writing center director) and student
surveys, it was found that students valued the computer work yet regretted the
inavailability of one-to-one conference tutors for their drafts. (Tutors were vol-
unteers, since the writing center budget made no provision for them.) The study
concludes with a hope that the college will recognize the need for increased com-
puter-supported instruction and one-on-one conferencing and budget accordingly.

LEIGH—SPEECH WRITING AT AGRA: WRITING IN THE TRENCHES
Drawing upon on-site observations, numerous interviews with writers, and analy-
sis of speeches they have produced, this ethnography describes speech writing by
four civil servants for the director of a high-profile government organization. These
writers develop speeches that the director will present based primarily on three
factors: the director’s history and favorite dictums, popular metaphors of the time,
and the administration’s official position on topics addressed in each speech. Six
people appear on the clearance sheet for each speech, to monitor an average of
sixteen speeches per month. The writers’ work is self-described as in the “trenches,”
since they write individually yet as a team, supporting one another regularly
through reviews and edits, and particularly when any member is “crashing” on
a speech. Part of their work entails listening to the director as he delivers speeches
and taking notes on falters and strong moments. The personality of the speaker
is the driving force behind work in this idea factory, which relies heavily on recy-
cling ideas that have worked well in previous speeches.

LENA—PRODUCING A JOURNAL FOR SCIENCE EDUCATORS: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
This study provides some insight into the culture of a small staff who have the
responsibility of producing one of the several magazines of a national associa-
tion on science education. The study describes both the national association as
well as the slick, four-color magazine the staff produces. Primarily through de-
tailed description of each staff member and the role he or she plays in producing
the publication, the author discusses the management philosophy of the manag-
ing editor, the harmonious interaction of the staff members, the challenge of editing
articles by novice writers, the practice of hiring freelance graphic artists, and the
association’s concern about safety issues. Based on some of the comments made
by the staff members, the document also contains a discussion of career advance-
ment issues for those in writing, editing, and graphic design; for publications
professionals, the author indicates that an employee’s earning power may never
increase dramatically unless the employee enters management and leaves writ-
ing, editing, and designing to the more poorly paid. The document concludes with
238   APPENDIX D

a discussion of the application of the word “ethnography” to studies about
nonethnic groups. The conclusion also contains a few comments about ways to
obtain better, more complete, more interesting field data.

LISA—WRITING AT COMMUNITY NATIONAL BANK
To study writing at my place of work, a small year-old bank in northern Virginia
referred to here as Community National, I used document analysis, interviews,
and observations. Against a projected image of “family” (twelve eight-by-ten
portraits of each of Community’s employees hang on the wall of the “family room”
where customers wait until bank representatives greet them), I analyzed a schism
in management and writing styles between the bank’s two principal divisions:
Operations and Commercial Loans. Staffing of each division follows gender lines,
Operations consisting of ten females and Commercial Loans of two males. Writ-
ing style in each division is markedly different, with Operations writing charac-
terized by brevity, direct phrasing, and occasional colloquialisms and Loan writ-
ing characterized by wordiness, legal terminology, and formality. Analysis showed
that these written styles, adopted from general styles within the industry, in this
setting also melded with oral interactions among genders, in particular as males
associated the discursive style of loans with banking tradition, to which women
were perceived as newcomers.

LIZ—WRITING STYLE AT THE WORLD BANK: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
With approximately 9,500 staff occupying some 19 buildings in downtown
Washington, D.C., the World Bank is the largest development bank lending to
developing countries in the world. Staff at the bank fall into two categories, pro-
fessional and support, separated by a glass ceiling and reflected in the title of an
anonymously authored text, “How to Write Like the Rest of Us,” in which the
style of bank reports is parodied through wordiness, repeated nominalizations,
and local jargon. This ethnography supplements this internal view with the opin-
ions gained through interviews with report writing instructors in the training
division, editors, and report authors. Based on these opinions and other materi-
als gained as a participant-observer, the author concludes that the competitive,
status-conscious environment seems to promote a ponderous, academic writing
style in which staff display their knowledge by overwriting and, ironically, at the
same time display their deficient mastery of the English language.

LOIS—WRITING CORPORATE CULTURE: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF
CORPORATE CULTURES IN A VIRTUAL OFFICE ENVIRONMENT
The author, a graduate student of professional writing, performed an ethnographic
study of the development of corporate cultures and countercultures within her
employer’s sales department during a time of extensive reorganization and refor-
mulation of the corporate mission. These events occurred in a virtual (home-based)
workplace environment where written documents were the principal means of
communication within and between work groups. Her observations about the
existence of imposed and reactive cultural products within the organization de-
fines a gap where there is no intersection of the disparate corporate cultures. The
maintenance of this gap consumes a significant amount of energy in the company.
The author considers the impact of her position as a midcareer female manager
on her data collection and evaluation activities.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     239

MACK—PERZINE ETHNOGRAPHY

The personal magazine (Perzine) explosion has not gone unnoticed. From Time
to Seventeen to Playboy to the Chronicle of Higher Education the phenomenon
has been examined and commented upon. Much has been made of motivation:
What drives people to bare their souls in writing for the entertainment of com-
plete strangers? I’ve avoided entering a discussion on reasons and concentrated
more on ways. How do the writers write? How do they put their zines together?
How do they use language? How do they consider audience response? How do
they edit? This ethnography begins with a brief examination of the respondents
and their reading habits. Obvious connections exist that need more teasing apart.
Next comes a look at the editing process, followed by short sections on audience
response considerations, ’zine slang and conventions, production, and the ’zine
look. An annotated bibliography concludes the paper.

MAGGIE—THE BATTLE OF THE BOOK: ONE EDITOR’S STRUGGLE
This study of a midsize book publishing firm, by following the production of a
manuscript from idea to bound book, reveals a culture in which workers are
largely autodidactic. The narrator—also the researcher and associate editor at
the company operating from an office distant from the company’s main hub—
walks through the workplace experience, which include communicating with
authors and colleagues in another city via e-mail, telephone, fax, voice mail, and
overnight delivery service in order to bring a product to fruition. This piece of-
fers to the first-time professional insider tips on the steps of the trade, the subtle
nuances necessary to work with other employees, how to communicate with face-
less authors, how to transform countless e-mail messages into a bound book, and,
with a little luck and tenacity, how to do it right the first time.

MANDY—AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF WRITING
IN A CONSTRUCTION ASSOCIATION
While working as a secretary at Boston, a leading national trade association rep-
resenting 8,000 general contractor firms and some 24,500 industry associate
members in 102 chapters nationwide, I used participant-observation techniques
to study writing as it was part of this local culture. This culture is almost exclu-
sively white and male, reflected in a hierarchy that includes nonwhites only in
administrative positions and in the mail room. The culture also includes many
illicit maneuvers among certain middle managers as they attempt to finesse the
bureaucracy for personal gain. This study focused on document production as it
was affected by both the racism and sexism of the culture and by the finessing of
one middle manager. Since document production followed highly irregular, in-
terrupted, and unnecessarily reiterative paths, this study reveals a process ren-
dered extremely expensive through the withholding of knowledge among divi-
sions and ultimately wasteful of both human and material resources.

MARLA—COMMUNICATIONS WITHIN A HIGH SCHOOL: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
Through the use of recognized ethnographic techniques, I have launched a study
of how and what coworkers in a public high school communicate with each other.
By carefully researching my own workplace, a setting I know well, I have tried to
establish both insider and outsider views. Stemming from numerous interviews
with certified staff, teachers and administrators, a few key issues emerged. Among
240   APPENDIX D

the staff’s concerns are a feeling of being ill-informed, a sense of powerlessness,
and a desire to improve lines of communication throughout the ranks. Everyone
with whom I conferred expressed a sincere wish to communicate in an efficient,
effective manner. I believe that any flaws in the system are unintentional.

MARY—DEADLINES AND BYLINES: TIME AND COLLABORATIVE
WRITING IN THE CORPORATE ENVIRONMENT

This study describes the role of organizational structure and hierarchy in the
production of corporate documents. By examining a top management consulting
firm that predicts the decline of corporate hierarchy as we know it, this paper dis-
cusses how the firm’s unique nonhierarchical environment allows its employees
to efficiently produce collaboratively written documents.

MAY—HOW MANY HANDS ARE ON THIS? A LOOK AT THE INFLUENCES
ON THE PUBLIC RELATIONS WRITING AT CAPITOL HOSPITAL
This ethnography examines how the writing of the marketing and public relations
department at Capitol Hospital (a pseudonym) impacted various members of the
local work culture. I interviewed representatives from the hospital who were in-
volved in the writing process as editors, those who provided quotes and background
information or posed for photographs, and I share segments of these in-depth dis-
cussions in this study. Through my research an individualistic behavior is exem-
plified in the published hospital “beliefs” and mission statement produced by the
executives and board members, where improving oneself and helping those in one’s
immediate area are spoken of in high regard; however, concepts such as team-
work are not directly addressed. Thus the marketing and public relations depart-
ment’s call for departments, subsidiary offices, off-campus physicians, and board
members to band together to promote the hospital to the community and other
professional services through written communication pieces was received passively,
and in some cases, with a disgruntled attitude and even refusal. This ethnogra-
phy draws conclusions regarding the reasoning for the culture’s poor attitude for
the work of the public relations materials, with an emphasis on upper manage-
ment’s experience and regard for the marketing and public relations department.

MEG—PROVING WORTH AND MANAGING EXPECTATIONS:
THE CORPORATE MONTHLY REPORT
This study focuses on a global information corporation and its corporate depart-
ments’ use of a monthly report to manage expectations, promote individuals’
work, and reaffirm the worth of individuals and departments. The study also fo-
cuses on how in this corporate culture, effectively portraying work accomplished
equals, to some extent, success. While many lower-level workers view the reporting
mechanism as “jumping through hoops,” other senior-level employees view it as
a reflection on their management, hard work, and reason for existing within the
corporation. The department I studied does not bring in revenue, and so in this
case, the effective use of words equals dollar signs.

MEGAN—INTENTIONAL VAGUENESS IN DEVELOPMENT DISCOURSE

This ethnography is the continuation of an emerging discussion in academia re-
garding the purpose and necessity of vague language in particular situations. This
paper focuses on the reasons why fund raisers need to be intentionally vague in
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     241

some written documents and publications. The reasons include the need for time-
less language to allow for the greatest degree of flexibility, broad language that
allows a scholarship or program to be inclusive of as many potential student
beneficiaries as possible, and personal letters that must be applied to a wide au-
dience. Implications are drawn for a greater awareness and acceptance of strate-
gic vagueness in academic, scientific, and professional writing.

NANCY AND ELLIE—HTO: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF WRITING
IN AN EDUCATIONAL FACILITY PLANNING COMPANY
This study uses two researchers, one from inside the company and one from out-
side, to gain definite emic and etic perspectives at the start of the research pro-
cess. They examined the writing of a small educational facility planning company
and the environment that allows the writing to occur. They discovered that a
family-type atmosphere had developed from the intense collaboration among the
employees who were constantly striving to complete a project for a client. The
limited number of employees causes the documents produced to be standardized
to save time, so authorship and creativity are often lost. The question of who is
an expert appeared repeatedly during the study. Each member of the company
realized the importance of her own roles and the need for collaboration to pro-
duce a document.

NIDEAN—ASCRIBING MEANING TO MUSCLES: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF
HOW A FITNESS FACILITY MANIPULATES WITH LANGUAGE
This study examines a fitness company owner’s meaning-making language tac-
tics, aimed strategically at ensnaring clients. It looks first at the way company
documents linguistically pull clients in through subtle choices in document de-
sign and wording. Then it examines how gym discourse works to keep them “in,”
primarily through attributing power to a trim and toned body and sloth to a soft
and weak one. Next, the study explores how fitness fanaticism has become a cul-
tural panacea for those with marginal senses of self-esteem and thus how this
company has made an easy entrance into this manipulation. Finally, it looks briefly
at the fitness “rules” the company generates to codify beliefs in writing and to
firm up client devotion.

NORMA—MEDICAL SHORTHAND
Writing in a doctor’s office is not only affected by customary practice, but by time
allocation. Medical shorthand, common in the medical field, is used by Dr. Dixon
and his staff to document patient information. This shorthand is of a consistent
style and finds its way into home and outside use. Moreover, the concise and to-
the-point writing style that shorthand demands is also seen in letters, manuals,
and reports written by staff. Time to write is the greatest challenge the office faces
on a daily basis. Constant use of medical shorthand makes that time.

NYCK—WRITING A COMPANY’S IMAGE AND WORKERS’ SELF-IMAGES
This ethnographic study explores the extent to which written documents encoun-
tered in the modern workplace affect a company’s image and even the self-image
of the employees within that workplace. It also examines how the lack of written
documents in one workplace adversely affected the company image and led in
several cases to internal conflict and poor self-images among employees. This study
242   APPENDIX D

serves as a wake-up call for small businesses that have not yet developed an ex-
tensive written culture establishing formal written policies or setting goals and
norms. In the course of this project the author composed several policies, now
official, for his company.

PHOEBE—A PORTRAIT OF TWELVE ARTISTS AS A YOUNG 501C-3: AN ETHNOGRA-
PHY ON THE WORKPLACE CULTURE OF A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
This ethnography attempts to delineate some of the differences between a corpo-
rate workplace structure and a nonprofit workplace structure based upon the com-
munication that takes place there. Ethnographic observations on organizational
structures and corporate environments cannot be transposed to the not-for-profit
sector. As this ethnography demonstrates, a principle reason for employees to
choose to work in the nonprofit environment is knowing that their hard work is
making a difference in another writer’s life. It is the preservation of the craft of
writing that is the cause, the driving force, behind their efforts. There are very
different types of employees that are present in a nonprofit workplace, as a re-
sult. The nonprofit becomes a separate culture from other corporations because
of this artistic backbone of its structure and the mission as priority as opposed to
the almighty profit margin. As seen in the analysis of interoffice correspondence
via Internet, memorandums, and voice mail messages, the personalities of these
artists emerge. Staff members all have an idiosyncratic style and tone to their
correspondence, reflecting their mood, attitude, and individuality, as well as their
position within this unique structure.

RACHEL—THE WRITING CULTURE IN THE DEFENSE
ATTACHÉ SECTION OF AN EMBASSY
This study relates the writing culture in a defense attaché section of a foreign
embassy, in which much of the report writing is accomplished by attachés and
foreign language assistants (FLAs). This section of the embassy employs fourteen
military and ten civilian employees; because women may not serve in the country’s
armed forces, all of the military employees are male and all of the civilian em-
ployees are female. Because only attachés’ names may appear on reports, those
of the FLAs never appear, rendering much of their work invisible and the grounds
upon which they might request increases in the pay scale unsolid. Because the local
culture is anchored in a highly authoritarian tradition of the military, these is-
sues of inequity are not likely to be resolved.

RAVI—CONVENTIONS: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
OF THE CORPORATE CULTURE AT “SOFTDEV”
In a business world where conventions such as working nine to five and having
a set lunch break every day have become commonplace, it is difficult to imagine
a corporate culture that diverges from this well-laid path. The stark, rigid angles
of cubicle walls have become the foundation for America’s corporate world, and
the accepted conventions of working in this world have become nearly as rigid.
Yet there are companies that enjoy a different sort of corporate culture—like
SoftDev. The corporate culture of an organization can reveal itself to observers
in many ways—but for this particular study, I focus on the topic of writing pro-
cesses at SoftDev and outline how they can illuminate the nuances of this corpo-
rate culture in terms of office hierarchy, meetings, office hours, and dress code. I
show that the deliberate flouting of conventions such as hierarchical culture and
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    243

carefully structured meetings actually feeds collaborative processes in develop-
ment and marketing writing.

RAY—POLICY WRITING IN A SMALL TOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT

My study of the implementation of a new vehicle response and pursuit policy for
a small town police department mostly involved the observation of police depart-
ment employees in their daily routine surrounding the policy’s development. As
the department’s policy manual writer and editor, I was provided with the op-
portunity to observe closely the department’s administrative staff as the policy
moved toward completion. Observations of staff meetings to discuss policy and
reflections on private meetings with the chief about this policy reveal a culture
that is strongly oral, with stories used to solidify alliances within the culture. As
a writer in this culture, I became positioned as the one who was responsible for
the policy rather than the one who was consolidating decisions and mandates in
written form.

RED—THE SCRIBNER: A STUDY OF NEWSROOM CULTURE
The Scribner is growing during a time when the newspaper industry is dissolv-
ing. Although the Scribner is growing, its newsroom faces internal and external
pressures that have adversely affected morale and now threaten the quality of the
Scribner’s chain of newspapers. This study shows how some of the pressures are
uncontrollable because they have developed outside the company in the newspa-
per marketplace. But others have been misapplied by the Scribner owners and
should be eliminated. And still others have developed inside the newsroom be-
cause of conflicting personalities and a lack of communication among the edito-
rial staff. This ethnography presents an account of these pressures—how they
originated, how they affect the people’s writing and how they should be dealt with
in this newsroom culture.

REX—THE BOUNDARIES OF LANGUAGE: INDEXERS’ WRITING
CULTURE AT A NATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE
Through observations and interviews, I studied the thirty full-time employees that
index and abstract illustrations at a prestigious national monthly magazine. As
the study progressed, it became clear that spatial boundaries established by work
spaces in certain clusters were mirrored by linguistic boundaries established be-
tween veteran and novice writers. In particular, standards for captions among vet-
erans dictated brevity, and transgressors of these standards (mostly novices) were
regularly chided for producing “novelettes.” In addition to these boundaries stood
boundaries between administrators and abstracters, who occasionally parodied
administrative jargon in jokes played upon one another.

SARAH—THE LONELINESS OF THE LONG-DISTANCE WRITER
AND OTHER MATTERS: FREELANCE WRITERS AT WORK
This project explores the working culture of freelance writers. Five writers were
interviewed in person, one by questionnaire, and background research was done
on the trend toward working at home. The following conclusions were reached:
(1) getting a freelance business started is difficult and the best way to do it is to
get a job as a writer and build up a freelance business part-time through those
contacts; (2) while freelance writing offers a tremendous amount of freedom and
244   APPENDIX D

diversity, the isolation of working alone at home is a problem for writers, even
those who are self-described “introverts”; (3) the workplace is changing rapidly
and new arrangements for getting the work done are gaining favor.

STARLA—CORPORATE COMMUNICATION OR
CORPORATE CONFUSION? AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
As an MA student in professional writing and editing, I undertook a three-month
ethnographic study of my workplace culture while also operating as a full-time
member of that workplace—the corporate communications department of a large
financial services corporation. My study yielded observations of the confusion
that abounds in a writing culture where the lines of authority are not tightly drawn
as well as the confusion caused when the role of the corporate communications
department, both as it relates to senior management and to internal communica-
tion to employees, is in question. My study also included observations regarding
the exacerbating effect of immense change, both internal and external to the
company I studied, on the above areas of ambiguity. The study concludes that,
as communication is of utmost importance to the goals and objectives of a com-
pany, the lack of communication at the company I studied—and at corporations
across the board—should be evaluated and addressed.

SUE—WRITING PROCEDURES AND MORALE
IN A GOVERNMENT/MILITARY FIELD OFFICE

From February to May 1996, I have been studying my workplace and identify-
ing reasons why the morale has been so low there. There are many factors—per-
sonalities, management’s mistreatment of its employees, personal problems, and
so on—but the hardest hitting one is that the “systems” which have been set up
to support us have broken down, and they have yet to be fixed. These systems
have to do with the publication of reports, known here as Generic Documents
(GD). Tracking these reports from inception to publication revealed numerous
moments in the chain of command which allowed people to shirk their format-
ting and review responsibilities—in some cases for personal reasons and in oth-
ers for reasons stemming from long-standing feuds in the local culture. When a
shift from paper to paperless environment was introduced, some turnaround times
within the office were reduced, but turnaround times among offices were actu-
ally heightened because of incompatible systems. This issue remains unaddressed,
further undermining morale.

TESS—A WRITER’S SEARCH FOR MEANING IN THE WORKPLACE
This study is a reflective assessment of myself as a writer, whereby I compare two
different cultures in which I worked. The first is HappyTravel, a travel agency
serving primarily government, where I worked as a writer of internal publications
in the communications department. Here I encountered a highly oral culture in
which many of my routine questions such as “who is our audience?” were met
with surprise and even suspicion. I was laid off from this job while conducting
this study, prompting reflections on my former job as an assistant editor in the
publications department of an association. There, the culture was more immersed
in written production and knowledgeable of the intricate processes underlying
good writing and editing. More significantly, perhaps, the association culture relied
on written representations to sustain itself, whereas HappyTravel generated much
of its business over the phone.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   245

TOM—THE REVELATIONS OF ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATIVE MEMORANDA

In this brief paper the power-base relationships of a large community college sys-
tem are revealed when the ethnographer attempts to analyze the written commu-
nications of the college senate. The senate is a body of employees formed from
the three levels of employees—teaching faculty, administrative faculty, and clas-
sified staff—to represent the college community as a whole and to advise the
college president of their issues and concerns. Memos composed by the senate
chair (and edited by this researcher) reveal word choices subtly recalling earlier
discussions of topics in full senate meetings yet situating these topics to leverage
action on them now, selectively representing earlier discussions depending upon
the audience for the memo.
WORKS CITED


Althusser, Louis. “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses.” Lenin and
     Philosophy and Other Essays. Trans. Ben Brewster. London: New Left
     Books, 1971.
Anderson, Gary L., and Patricia Irvine. “Informing Critical Literacy with Eth-
     nography.” Critical Literacy: Politics, Praxis, and the Postmodern. Ed.
     Colin Lankshear and Peter L. McLaren. Albany: State U of New York P,
     1993. 81–104.
Anson, Chris M. “Distant Voices: Teaching and Writing in a Culture of Tech-
     nology.” College English 61 (1999):261–80.
Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Behar, Ruth. “Introduction: Out of Exile.” Women Writing Culture. Ed. Ruth
     Behar and Deborah Gordon. Berkeley: U of California P, 1995. 1–29.
Behar, Ruth, and Deborah Gordon, eds. Women Writing Culture. Berkeley: U
     of California P, 1995.
Belenky, Mary Field, Blythe McVicker Clinchy, Nancy Rule Goldberger, and
     Jill Mattuck Tarule. Women’s Ways of Knowing. New York: Basic Books,
     1997.
Belsey, Catherine. Critical Practice. London: Methuen, 1980.
Bennett, Tony. “Putting Policy into Cultural Studies.” Cultural Studies. Ed.
     Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula Treichler. New York:
     Routledge, 1992. 23–37.
Bennett, Tony, and Janet Woollacott. Bond and Beyond: The Political Career
     of a Cultural Hero. New York: Methuen, 1987.
Berlin, James A. “English Studies, Work, and Politics in the New Economy.”
     Composition in the Twenty-First Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z.
     Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern
     Illinois UP, 1996. 215–25.
———. Rhetoric and Reality: Writing Instruction in American Colleges,
     1900–1985. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1987.
———. Rhetorics, Poetics, and Cultures: Refiguring College English Studies.
     Urbana: NCTE, 1996.
———. “The Teacher as Researcher: Democracy, Dialogue, and Power.” The
     Writing Teacher as Researcher: Essays in the Theory and Practice of
     Class-Based Research. Ed. Donald A. Daiker and Max Morenberg.
     Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1990. 3–14.
Bourdieu, Pierre, and Jean-Claude Passeron. Reproduction in Education,
     Society, and Culture. 2nd ed. London: SAGE, 1990.
Brady, Laura. “A Contextual Theory for Business Writing.” Journal of
     Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993): 452–71.



                                                                           247
248   WORKS CITED

Brandt, Deborah. “Sponsors of Literacy.” College Composition and Commu-
     nication 49 (1998): 165–85.
Braudel, Fernand. The Identity of France. Trans. Siân Reynolds. New York:
     Harper & Row, 1988.
Britton, James, Tony Burgess, Nancy Martin, Alex McLeod, and Harold
     Rosen. The Development of Writing Abilities (11–18). London: Mac-
     millan, 1975.
Brodkey, Linda. “Modernism and the Scene(s) of Writing.” College English 49
     (1987): 396–418.
———. “On the Subjects of Class and Gender in ‘The Literacy Letters.’”
     College English 51 (1989): 125–41.
Brodkey, Linda, and Jim Henry. “Voice Lessons in a Poststructural Key: Notes
     on Response and Revision.” A Rhetoric of Doing: Essays on Written
     Discourse in Honor of James L. Kinneavy. Ed. Stephen P. Witte, Neil
     Nakadate, and Roger Cherry. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992.
     144–60.
Brown, Robert L., Jr. and Carl G. Herndl. “An Ethnographic Study of Cor-
     porate Writing: Job Status as Reflected in Written Text.” Functional
     Approaches to Writing: Research Perspectives. Ed. Barbara Couture.
     London: Frances Pinter, 1986. 11–28.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Table 2: Employment by occupation, 1996 and
     projected 2006. 4 July 1999.
     <http://www.fedstats.gov/index20.html>
———. Table 11: Employed persons by detailed occupation, sex, race, and
     Hispanic origin. 4 July 1999.
     <ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/lf/aat11.txt>
Burnett, Rebecca E. “Substantive Conflict in a Cooperative Context: A Way to
     Improve the Collaborative Planning of Workplace Documents.” Technical
     Communication 38 (1991): 532–39.
Chartier, Roger. The Order of Books. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1994.
Chatman, Seymour. Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and
     Film. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1978.
Clifford, James. “Introduction: Partial Truths.” Writing Culture: The Poetics
     and Politics of Ethnography. Ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus.
     Berkeley: U of California P, 1986. 1–26.
Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus, eds. Writing Culture: The Poetics and
     Politics of Ethnography. Berkeley: U of California P, 1986.
Couture, Barbara. “Categorizing Professional Discourse: Engineering, Admin-
     istrative, and Technical/Professional Writing.” Journal of Business and
     Technical Communication 6 (1992): 5–37.
Crowley, Sharon. Composition in the University: Historical and Polemical
     Essays. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1998.
———. “writing and Writing.” Writing and Reading Differently: Decon-
     struction and the Teaching of Composition and Literature. Ed. Douglas
     Atkins and Michael L. Johnson. Lawrence: UP of Kansas, 1985. 93–100.
Dark, Ken A. Theoretical Archaeology. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1995.
Davenport, Thomas. Information Ecology. New York: Oxford UP, 1997.
Debs, Mary Beth. “Corporate Authority: Sponsoring Rhetorical Practice.”
     Writing in the Workplace: New Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka.
     Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1993. 158–70.
                                                              WORKS CITED   249

Dias, Patrick, Aviva Freedman, Peter Medway, and Anthony Paré. Worlds
    Apart: Acting and Writing in Academic and Workplace Contexts.
    Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999.
Eisner, Elliot W., and Elizabeth Vallance. “Five Concepts of Curriculum: Their
    Roots and Implications for Curriculum Planning.” Conflicting Concepts
    of Curriculum. Ed. Elliot W. Eisner and Elizabeth Vallance. Berkeley:
    McCutchan, 1974. 1–18.
Elbow, Peter. “Closing My Eyes as I Speak: An Argument for Ignoring
    Audience.” College English 49 (1987): 50–69.
Emig, Janet. “Writing as a Mode of Learning.” College Composition and
    Communication 28 (1977): 122–28.
Faigley, Lester. Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity and the Subject of
    Composition. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1992.
Forman, Janis, ed. New Visions of Collaborative Writing. Portsmouth, NH:
    Boynton/Cook, 1992.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on
    Language. New York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
———. “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected
    Essays and Interviews by Michel Foucault. Ed. Donald R. Bouchard.
    Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1977. 101–20.
Freed, Richard. “Postmodern Practice: Perspectives and Prospects.” Profes-
    sional Communication: The Social Perspective. Ed. Nancy Roundy Blyler
    and Charlotte Thralls. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993. 196–14.
Frow, John. Cultural Studies and Cultural Value. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.
Garay, Mary Sue, and Stephen A. Bernhardt, eds. Expanding Literacies:
    English Teaching and the New Workplace. Albany: State U of New York
    P, 1998.
Gere, Anne Ruggles. “Kitchen Tables and Rented Rooms: The Extracurricu-
    lum of Composition.” College Composition and Communication 45
    (1994): 75–92.
Goswami, Dixie, and Peter R. Stillman, eds. Reclaiming the Classroom:
    Teacher Research as an Agency for Change. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
    Cook, 1987.
Gregory, Kathleen L. “Nature-View Paradigms: Multiple Cultures and Culture
    Conflicts in Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983):
    359–76.
Haas, Christina. Writing Technology: Studies on the Materiality of Literacy.
    Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
Hall, Stuart. “On Postmodernism and Articulation: An Interview with Stuart
    Hall.” Journal of Communication Inquiry 10 (1986): 45–60.
Harding, Sandra. “Introduction: Is There a Feminist Method?” Feminism and
    Methodology. Ed. Sandra Harding. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1987. 1–14.
Harvey, David. The Condition of Postmodernity. London: Blackwell, 1989.
Hayano, David M. “Auto-Ethnography: Paradigms, Problems, and Prospects.”
    Human Organization 38 (1979): 99–104.
Henry, Jim. “Documenting Contributory Expertise: The Value Added by
    Technical Communicators in Collaborative Writing Situations” Technical
    Communication 45 (1998): 207–20.
———. “Teaching Technical Authorship.” Technical Communication Quar-
    terly 4 (1995): 261–84.
250   WORKS CITED

———. “Toward Technical Authorship.” Journal of Technical Writing and
      Communication 24 (1994): 449–61.
Henry, Jim, and “George.” “Workplace Ghostwriting.” Journal of Business
      and Technical Communication 9 (1995): 425–45.
Herndl, Carl G. “Teaching Discourse and Reproducing Culture: A Critique of
      Research and Pedagogy in Professional and Non-Academic Writing.”
      College Composition and Communication 44 (1993): 349–63.
Holmes, Urban T., Jr. “Transitions in European Education.” Twelfth-Century
      Europe and the Foundations of Modern Society. Ed. Marshall Clagett, Gaines
      Post, and Robert Reynolds. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1966. 15–38.
hooks, bell. yearning: race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South End
      Press, 1990.
Hull, Glynda. “Hearing Other Voices: A Critical Assessment of Popular Views
      on Literacy and Work. Changing Work, Changing Workers: Critical
      Perspectives on Language, Literacy, and Skills. Ed. Glynda Hull. Albany,
      NY: State U of New York P, 1997. 3–39.
Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
      Durham: Duke UP, 1991.
Johannsen, Agneta M. “Applied Anthropology and Post-Modernist Ethnogra-
      phy.” Human Organization 51 (1992): 71–81.
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan. Nostalgic Angels: Rearticulating Hypertext Writing.
      Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company, 1997.
———. “Relocating the Value of Work: Technical Communication in a Post-
      Industrial Age.” Technical Communication Quarterly 5 (1996): 245–70.
Jolliffe, David. “Finding Yourself in the Text: Identity Formation in the
      Discourse of Workplace Documents. Changing Work, Changing Workers:
      Critical Perspectives on Language, Literacy, and Skills. Ed. Glynda Hull.
      Albany: State U of New York P, 1997. 335–49.
Katz, Steven. “The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and
      the Holocaust.” College English 54 (1992): 255–75.
Katz, Susan M. The Dynamics of Writing Review: Opportunities for Growth
      and Change in the Workplace. Stamford: Ablex, 1998.
Kenyatta, Jomo. Facing Mount Kenya. London: Secker and Warburg, 1938.
Kinneavy, James L. A Theory of Discourse. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
      Hall, 1971.
Kirsch, Gesa. “Methodological Pluralism.” Methods and Methodology in
      Composition Research. Ed. Gesa Kirsch and Patricia A. Sullivan. Car-
      bondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992. 247–69.
Kirsch, Gesa E., and Joy S. Ritchie. “Beyond the Personal: Theorizing a
      Politics of Location in Composition Research.” College Composition and
      Communication 46 (1995): 7–29.
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. “Mistaken Dichotomies.” Journal of Ameri-
      can Folklore 101 (1988): 140–55.
Kleimann, Susan. “The Reciprocal Relationship of Workplace Culture and
      Review.” Writing in the Workplace: New Research Perspectives. Ed.
      Rachel Spilka. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993. 56–70.
Kliebard, Herbert M. The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1893–1958.
      New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987.
Kondo, Dorinne. “Bad Girls: Theater, Women of Color, and the Politics of
      Representation.” Women Writing Culture. Ed. Ruth Behar and Deborah
      Gordon. Berkeley: U of California P, 1995. 49–64.
                                                             WORKS CITED   251

Kushner, Tony. Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes. Part
     One: Millennium Approaches. New York: Theatre Communications
     Group, 1993.
Lacan, Jacques. Ecrits: A Selection. New York: Norton, 1977.
Lanham, Richard. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the
     Arts. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1993.
Lather, Patti. Getting Smart: Feminist Research and Pedagogy with/in the
     Postmodern. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Lay, Mary M. and William M. Karis, eds. Collaborative Writing in Industry:
     Investigations in Theory and Practice. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1991.
Lay, Mary M., Billie J. Wahlstrom, Carolyn Rude, Cindy Selfe, and Jack Selzer.
     Technical Communication. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Leggo, Carl. “Questions I Need to Ask before I Advise My Students to Write
     in Their Own Voices.” Rhetoric Review 10 (1991): 143–52.
Lionnet, Françoise. “Autoethnography: The An-Archic Style of Dust Tracks
     on a Road.” Reading Black, Reading Feminist. Ed. Henry Louis Gates.
     New York: Meridian Press, 1990. 382–414.
Lunsford, Andrea Abernathy. “Rhetoric, Feminism, and the Politics of Textual
     Ownership.” College English 61 (1999): 529–44.
Lunsford, Andrea, and Lisa Ede. “Collaborative Authorship and the Teaching
     of Writing.” The Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in
     Law and Literature. Ed. Martha Woodmansee and Peter Jaszi. Durham:
     Duke UP, 1994. 417–38.
———. Singular Texts/Plural Authors: Perspectives on Collaborative Writing.
     Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1990.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
     Trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: U of Minne-
     sota P, 1984.
Martin, Henri-Jean. The History and Power of Writing. Trans. Lydia G.
     Cochrane. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1994.
McBeth, Sally. “Myths of Objectivity and the Collaborative Process in Life
     History Research.” When They Read What We Write: The Politics of
     Ethnography. Ed. Caroline B. Brettell. Westport: Bergin, 1993. 145–62.
Miller, Carolyn R. “Learning from History: World War II and the Culture of
     High Technology.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 12
     (1998): 288–315.
———. “What’s Practical about Technical Writing?” Technical Writing:
     Theory and Practice. Ed. Bertie E. Fearing and W. Keats Sparrow. New
     York: MLA, 1989. 14–24.
Miller, Richard E. “Fault Lines in the Contact Zone.” College English 56
     (1994): 389–408.
Miller, Susan. Textual Carnivals: The Politics of Composition. Carbondale:
     Southern Illinois UP, 1991.
Miller, Thomas P. “Treating Professional Writing as Social Praxis.” Journal of
     Advanced Composition 11 (1991): 57–72.
Morgan, Meg, and Mary Murray. “Insight and Collaborative Writing.”
     Collaborative Writing in Industry: Investigations in Theory and Practice.
     Ed. Mary M. Lay and William M. Karis. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1991.
     64–81.
Odell, Lee, and Dixie Goswami, ed. Writing in Nonacademic Settings. New
     York: Guilford, 1985.
252   WORKS CITED

Parker, William Riley. “Where Do English Departments Come From?” College
     English 28 (1967): 339–51.
Phelps, Louise Wetherbee. “Audience and Authorship: The Disappearing
     Boundary.” A Sense of Audience in Written Communication. Ed. Gesa
     Kirsch and Duane H. Roen. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990.
Piwowarczyk, Mary Ann. “The Narratee and the Situation of Enunciation: A
     Reconsideration of Prince’s Theory.” Genre 9 (1976): 161–77.
Porter, James E. “Developing a Postmodern Ethics of Rhetoric and Composi-
     tion.” Defining the New Rhetorics. Ed. Theresa Enos and Stuart C.
     Brown. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993. 207–26.
Porter, James E., and Patricia Sullivan. “Working Across Methodological
     Interfaces: The Study of Computers and Writing in the Workplace.”
     Electronic Literacies in the Workplace. Ed. Patricia Sullivan and Jennie
     Dautermann. Urbana: NCTE, 1996. 294–322.
Pratt, Mary Louise. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 91. New York:
     MLA, 1991. 33–40.
Prince, Gerald. A Dictionary of Narratology. Lincoln: U of Nebraska P, 1987.
———. “Introduction to the Study of the Narratee.” Reader Response
     Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism. Ed. Jane P. Tompkins.
     Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 1980. 7–25.
Reagan, Sally Barr, Thomas Fox, and David Bleich. Writing With: New
     Directions in Collaborative Teaching, Learning, and Research. Albany:
     State U of New York P, 1994.
Reich, Robert. The Work of Nations. New York: Vintage, 1992.
Rosaldo, Renato. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis.
     Boston: Beacon Press, 1993.
Russell, David R. Writing in the Academic Disciplines, 1870–1990: A Curricu-
     lar History. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1991.
Schein, Edgar H. “Organizational Culture.” American Psychologist 45 (1990):
     109–19.
Selber, Stuart A. “Beyond Skill Building: Challenges Facing Technical Commu-
     nication Teachers in the Computer Age.” Technical Communication
     Quarterly 3 (1994): 365–90.
Selber, Stuart A., Dan McGavin, William Klein, and Johndan Johnson-Eilola.
     “Issues in Hypertext-Supported Collaborative Writing.” Nonacademic
     Writing: Social Theory and Technology. Ed. Ann Hill Duin and Craig J.
     Hansen. Mahwah: Erlbaum. 257–80.
Selfe, Cynthia L. “Theorizing E-mail for the Practice, Instruction, and Study of
     Literacy.” Electronic Literacies in the Workplace. Ed. Patricia Sullivan
     and Jennie Dautermann. Urbana: NCTE, 1996. 255–93.
Selfe, Cynthia L., and Richard J. Selfe Jr. “Writing as Democratic Social
     Action in a Technological World: Politicizing and Inhabiting Virtual
     Landscapes.” Nonacademic Writing: Social Theory and Technology. Ed.
     Ann Hill Duin and Craig J. Hansen. Mahwah: Erlbaum. 325–58.
Selzer, Jack. “Intertextuality and the Writing Process: An Overview.” Writing
     in the Workplace:New Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka. Car-
     bondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993. 171–80.
Silverman, David, and Brian Torode. The Material Word: Some Theories of
     Language and its Limits. London: Routledge, 1980.
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, David James Miller, and Jeffrey Doak. “The Technical
     Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority.” Journal of
     Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993): 12–36.
                                                             WORKS CITED   253

Slevin, James. “Disciplining Students: Whom Should Composition Teach and
     What Should They Know?” Composition in the Twenty-First Century:
     Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z. Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward
     M. White. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1996. 153–65.
Society for Technical Communication. Special Section: Measuring the Value
     Added by Professional Technical Communicators. Technical Communica-
     tion 42 (1995): 23–83.
Spellmeyer, Kurt. “Foucault and the Freshman Writer: Considering the Self in
     Discourse.” College English 51 (1989): 715–29.
———. “Inventing the University Student.” Composition in the Twenty-First
     Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z. Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and
     Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1996. 39–44.
Spilka, Rachel. “Influencing Workplace Practice: A Challenge for Professional
     Writing Specialists in the Academy.” Writing in the Workplace: New
     Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
     UP, 1993. 207–19.
Stewart, Donald C. “Two Model Teachers and the Harvardization of English
     Departments.” The Rhetorical Tradition and Modern Writing. Ed. James
     J. Murphy. New York: MLA, 1982. 118–29.
Sullivan, Patricia A. “Feminism and Methodology in Composition Studies.”
     Methods and Methodology in Composition Research. Ed. Gesa Kirsch
     and Patricia A. Sullivan. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992. 37–61.
Sullivan, Patricia A., and James E. Porter. “Remapping Curricular Geography:
     Professional Writing in/and English.” Journal of Business and Technical
     Communication 7 (1993): 389–422.
Taylor, Frederick W. The Principles of Scientific Management. New York:
     Harper & Brothers, 1911.
Trimbur, John. “Writing Instruction and the Politics of Professionalization.”
     Composition in the Twenty-First Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z.
     Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern
     Illinois UP, 1996. 133–45.
Tufte, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire: Graphics Press, 1990.
Van Maanen, John, and Stephen R. Barley. “Occupational Communities:
     Culture and Control in Organizations.” Research in Organizational
     Behavior. Ed. B. M. Straw and L. L. Cummings Greenwich, CT: JAI
     Press, 1984.
van Slyck, Phyllis. “Repositioning Ourselves in the Contact Zones.” College
     English 59 (1997): 149–70.
Virilio, Paul. Speed and Politics: An Essay on Domology. Trans. M. Polizzotti.
     New York: Semiotext(e), 1986.
White, Hayden. The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical
     Representation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1987.
Winsor, Dorothy. “Owning Corporate Texts.” Journal of Business and
     Technical Communication 7 (1993): 179–95.
Woodmansee, Martha. “On the Author Effect: Recovering Collectivity.” The
     Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in Law and Litera-
     ture. Ed. Martha Woodmansee and Peter Jaszi. Durham: Duke UP,
     1994. 1–14.
Yates, JoAnne. Control through Communication: The Rise of System in
     American Management. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1989.
Young, Richard E., Alton L. Becker, and Kenneth L. Pike. Rhetoric: Discovery
     and Change. New York: Harcourt, 1970.
254   WORKS CITED

Zebroski, James Thomas, and Nancy Mack. “Ethnographic Writing for
    Critical Consciousness.” Social Issues in the English Classroom. Ed.
    C. Mark Hurlbert and Samuel Totten. Urbana: NCTE, 1992. 269–82.
Zuboff, Shoshana. In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work
    and Power. New York: Basic Books, 1988.
INDEX

Adam, 39, 40, 41, 55, 85, 97, 103, 105,            59, 81, 117, 133, 153; organizational,
   124, 187, 189, 211, 221                         172–73, 182, 183–84; and ownership,
Adria, 40, 42, 55, 73, 76, 79, 85–86, 95,          45; as a sociological function, 30, 143;
   101, 103, 187, 189, 211, 221                    technical, 143, 145; theories of, 12, 16–
agency: as circumscribed by cultural and dis-      17, 19–20, 29–34, 45, 142
   cursive practices, 2, 28, 45–46, 120,        autoethnography, 49–67, 92–93, 126, 131,
   151; as implied, 124; intermediary, 155–        180
   58; obfuscation of, 149; in stabilization
   and change, 86, 89; among subject po-        Barthes, Roland, 16, 142
   sitions, 97, 125–26                          Behar, Ruth, 24, 162
Albert, 37, 42, 55, 58, 73, 95–96, 103, 135,    Belenky, Mary Field, et al., 174
   153, 187, 189–90, 214, 221–22                Belmont Report, 7
Alice, 37, 38, 39, 63, 85–86, 95, 99, 176,      Belsey, Catherine, 122, 124, 167
   188, 190, 218, 222                           Bergoffen, Debra, 9, 24
Althusser, Louis, 16, 123                       Berlin, James, 2, 7, 115, 117
Amy, 95, 100, 187, 190, 211, 222                Bernie, 37, 42, 60, 61, 75, 87, 101, 103,
Ana, 27–28, 58, 75, 79, 82, 85, 87, 95, 101,        139–40, 187, 192, 216, 224
   103, 105, 187, 190, 214, 222                 Bourdieu, Pierre, and Jean-Claude Passeron,
Andrew, 41, 42, 63, 85, 187, 191, 218, 223          164
Angels in America (Kushner), 161, 172, 182      Branden, 15, 21, 25–27, 39, 57, 58, 79, 95,
Anita, 37, 39, 41, 58, 75, 95, 101, 105, 187,       100, 105, 183, 188, 192, 215, 224
   191, 215, 223                                Brandt, Deborah, 174
Ann, 29–31, 39, 40, 54, 75, 76, 95, 97, 100,    Braudel, Fernand, 130
   105, 174, 187, 191, 211, 223                 Brenda, 37–39, 41, 58, 60, 76, 79, 80, 95,
Anne, 15, 20, 21, 63, 87, 95, 103, 188, 192,        187, 192, 216, 224
   218, 223–24                                  Britton, James, et al., 147
anthropology: applied, 163; epistemology        Brodkey, Linda, 38, 91, 123, 173
   of, 1, 7–9, 50–52                            Bureau of Labor, 32, 44
archaeological digs: and classification of      Burr, Zofia, 179, 181
   shards, 35; and hypertext excavations,
   10; processes for conducting, 9; shards      Carolyn, 41, 42, 55, 75, 79, 95, 97, 103,
   in, 9                                            187, 188, 192, 211, 225
audience: advocacy for, 147; and author-        Cass, 37, 41, 42, 57, 58, 82, 101, 105, 187,
   ship, 131, 170–71; multiple, 63, 65;             193, 215, 225
   public as, 57, 58, 65; serial, 63, 65. See   Challie, 43, 61, 62, 85, 95, 126, 151, 187,
   also reader                                      188, 193, 216, 225
author: death of, 16, 142; function, 26, 118;   Chatman, Seymour, 20, 147
   implied, 12, 19–22, 26, 74, 144, 148;        Chet, 39–41, 54, 76, 79, 97, 103, 105, 187–
   real, 19–22, 112, 146, 148, 165                  88, 193, 211, 225–26
authorship: and audience, 131, 179–81; and      Clifford, James, 1, 3, 166
   authority, 12, 134; collaborative, 38, 42,   cognitive mapping, 71–72


                                                                                        255
256    INDEX

collaboration, xiii, 42, 44, 58, 59, 64, 81;           “multilayerdness” of, 114; multiple
    and collective reports, 58; and individual         forms of, 98–100, 123–24, 151–52; of-
    contributions, 58. See also authorship, col-       ficial organizational, 100; “performa-
    laborative; composition, collaborative             tive” model of, 114; and points of appli-
Communications Decency Act, 172                        cation, 26; political, 58–59; postmodern
community colleges, 86, 177                            theories of, 91–92, 114–15; and prac-
composition: and affect, 39–43, 102–5, 112,            tices and traditions, 16; products, 97–
    121–22; collaborative, 38, 42, 58–59,              98; racist, 93, 101; sexist, 93, 101, 103;
    132–34, 154–55; computerized, 134–                 sites of, 9; specialists, 119; studies, 120–
    36; current-traditional, 2–4, 30–32; cur-          27; of surveillance, 80, 104, 129; twen-
    ricular alternatives, 128; deficit models          tieth-century, 10, 20; underlying, 100–
    of, 18; and discursive experience, ix–xi,          102, 123–24, 151–52; unities of, 24,
    3–4, 31; expressivism, 112–13; episte-             88–89, 93; vague, 63, 73–74, 87, 96
    mology, 4, 6, 17, 30–32, 43–46, 65, 108,       discursive constructions: of the “I,” 4, 15–
    117, 140–42, 183; and ethos, 126, 149;             16, 31, 121–26, 165–68; of the “other,”
    as a field, 16, 119; and hypertext, 130–           125–26, 136, 166; of the “self,” 16–18,
    31; in modernist modes, 120; in post-              20, 26, 125–26, 133, 136, 166
    modern modes, 120–27, 135; process             discursive formations, 16, 26, 36–46, 119,
    pedagogy, x, 120–26; and research pa-              132, 180
    pers, 3                                        Doak, Jeffrey, 69, 70, 143–44
Conference on College Composition and              document processes, 78–81, 89, 153–55
    Communication, 149, 183                        domain of professional authorship, 146–
contact zones, 51, 119, 126, 180–81                    49
Corinne, 39–42, 60, 87, 95, 97, 187, 193,
    217, 226                                       Ede, Lisa, 132–33
Crowley, Sharon, 2, 30–32, 120, 122, 126,          Elaine, 40, 55, 73, 82, 95, 97, 99, 103, 188,
    128, 142, 183                                      194, 212, 227
cultural reproduction, 98, 151                     Ella, 41–42, 55, 75–76, 79, 82, 87, 95, 103,
cultures, codex, 4                                     105, 167, 194, 212, 227
curriculum: “academic rationalist,” 127;           Ellie, 39, 54, 73, 76, 79, 95, 187, 205, 213,
    and “extracurriculum,” 176–77; “geog-              241
    raphies of,” 32–33, 118; of professional       Emma, 37, 39, 63, 82, 95, 176, 195, 218,
    writing, 127–36; and “self-actualiza-              228
    tion,” 127–128, 164; “social-efficiency,”      English: and belles lettres, 3; departments of,
    4; social reconstruction, 164                      ix–x, 3, 32–33, 129, 137
                                                   ethnography: performative, 162, 179; theo-
Daisy, 37, 39, 40–42, 76, 79–80, 95, 103,              ry, 50–52
    187, 194, 211, 226                             ethos, 126, 149–58, 167
Debs, Mary Beth, 69, 70, 139, 156, 177             expressivism. See composition
Department of Commerce, 27, 57
Derrida, Jacques, 15, 181                          Faigley, Lester, 2, 28, 118
Diane, 41, 60, 75, 82, 95, 98–99, 101, 103,        feminism, 23, 162, 174, 182
    105, 187, 194, 217, 226–27                     folklore, 65–66
discourse: academic, 95; administrative, 105;      Foucault, Michel, xi, 8–10, 24, 26, 29–30
    analysis, xi; authoritarian, 104; commu-       Frow, John, 44, 111–13, 119, 125, 159, 169
    nity, 82, 94, 99–100, 107; critical rela-
    tionship with, 15, 184; definitions of, 92;    Gary, 37, 39, 55, 73, 87, 95, 97–98, 101,
    effects of, 102–6; events of, 9; first-per-       146, 170, 188, 195, 212, 227–28
    son, 4; and formations, 26; forms of, 94–      General Accounting Office, 154
    102; heterosexist, 101; instrumental, xi,      George, 37, 40, 57–59, 75, 79–80, 100–
    11, 106; management, 101–3; market,               101, 103, 105, 158, 175–76, 187, 195,
    101; modernist theories of, 114–16;               215, 228
                                                                                 INDEX     257

Ginger, 40–42, 55, 75, 82, 87, 98, 105, 187,     Joanne, 40, 42, 55, 73, 76, 79, 82, 95, 187,
   195, 212, 228                                     199, 212, 233
Gloria, 39–42, 57–58, 73, 82, 95–97, 176,        Joe, 39, 42, 55, 76, 95, 97–98, 187, 199–
   187, 196, 215, 228–29                             200, 212, 233–34
Grace, 37–38, 41, 73, 79–80, 82, 95, 105,        Johnson-Eilola, Johndan, 44, 130, 134–35,
   187, 196, 217, 229                                153
Gwen, 37–39, 41–42, 58, 73, 75, 95, 103–         Jolliffe, David, 124
   4, 121, 154, 187, 196, 215, 229               Jones, Grace, 161–62, 182
                                                 journals, 87, 121, 124. See also self-docu-
Hart, 37, 39, 63, 82–83, 95, 97, 156, 187,           mentation
    196, 218, 229–30                             Julie, 63, 95, 99, 176, 188, 200, 219, 234
Harvard model, ix, 3
Harvey, David, 178, 180                          Kali, 58, 75, 82, 87, 95, 101, 103, 178, 187,
Hayano, David, 49, 89                               200, 215, 234
Heather, 37, 60, 75, 85, 103, 105, 187, 197,     Karla, 38, 40, 60, 75, 79–80, 95, 97, 101,
    217, 230                                        105, 187, 200, 217, 234–35
Helen, 30, 41, 58, 61, 73, 79–80, 95, 97–        Kate, 63, 73, 82, 87, 95, 99, 188, 200–201,
    98, 176, 187, 197, 215, 230                     219, 235
heuristics, in interpreting data, 11             Kelly, 39, 41–42, 63, 76, 79–80, 82, 85–86,
hierarchy: flattened, 116–17, 134, 171; and         103, 187–88, 201, 219, 235
    information flow, 81, 88, 152, 185–86        Kenyata, Jomo, 50
Holly, 39, 41, 55, 57, 79, 85, 95, 103, 105,     Kirsten, 37, 39, 41–42, 60–61, 73, 76, 79,
    187, 197, 212, 230                              82, 95, 101, 103, 187, 201, 218, 235
Hurston, Zora Neale, 51–52, 66, 126              Kolar, 58–59, 73, 75, 85, 87, 95, 101, 105,
                                                    187, 201, 216, 236
identities: subjective, 52; subjective work,     Kondo, Dorinne, 161–62, 179
    52, 66                                       Kushner, Tony, 161, 182
ideology: as symbolic representations, 124–      Kyle, 37–39, 41, 60, 62, 73, 79–80, 95, 97,
    27, 156; zero-sum, 88                           103, 105, 176, 187, 201, 218, 236
“informating,” 134
information workers, 111, 113                    Lacan, Jacques, 16
“interdiscursivity,” 124                         Lara, 63, 82, 95, 188, 201–2, 219, 236
intertextuality, 132, 146                        Lather, Patti, 122, 181
intervention, 161–84                             Leathe, 41, 55, 73, 76, 82, 95, 97, 116, 187,
Itsy, 37, 60, 95, 187, 197, 217, 230–31              202, 213, 236–37
                                                 Lee, 39, 42, 63, 86–87, 95, 176, 188, 202,
Jackie, 39, 41–42, 60–62, 76, 79–80, 82,             219, 237
     85, 95, 97–99, 105, 187–88, 197–98,         Leggo, Carl, 123
     217, 231                                    Leigh, 39, 41, 58–59, 73, 75–76, 79, 95,
Jan, 37, 60–61, 75, 85, 87, 95–96, 101, 187,         100, 103, 184, 187, 202, 216, 237
     198, 217, 231                               Lena, 60, 75, 79–80, 95, 97, 101, 105, 159,
Jane, 42, 58, 75, 79, 82, 95, 103, 105, 185,         187, 203, 218, 237–38
     198, 215, 231                               liberal humanism, ix, 3, 108
Janice, 37, 39, 54, 73, 85, 87, 95, 188, 198,    Library of Congress, 57, 96, 176
     212, 232                                    Lionnet, Françoise, 51
Jeff, 40–41, 55, 73, 75–76, 82–83, 95, 98–       Lisa, 39, 42, 55, 82–83, 95, 96, 101, 103,
     99, 105, 154, 175, 187, 198, 212, 232           175, 187–88, 203, 213, 238
Jen, 40, 55, 95, 97–99, 156, 187, 198–99,        literacy: demands in high-volume work-
     212, 232                                        place, ix, 5; projects, critical, 11, 177;
Jihad, 95–96, 105, 188, 199, 212, 233                sponsorship of, 174
Jillian, 39, 41, 63, 85–86, 95, 176, 188, 199,   Liz, 40, 57–58, 73, 75, 82, 187, 203, 216,
     219, 233                                        238
258   INDEX

logs. See journals                            policy, writing of, 58–59
Lois, 39, 42, 54–55, 82, 95–96, 98–99, 101,   Porter, James E., 11, 22, 32–33, 118, 147,
   105, 187, 203, 213, 238                       149–50
Lunsford, Andrea, 45, 132–33                  post-Fordism: and “flexibility” of labor, 43,
Lyotard, Jean-François, 10–11                    76, 111, 113, 178
                                              postmodernism, xi, 1–2, 11, 16–17, 91–93,
Mack, 40–42, 54–55, 95, 103, 187, 203–4,         114–15, 163; theoretical tenets and daily
   213, 239                                      life, 2
Maggie, 38–39, 41–42, 79, 95, 97, 103,        Prague Linguistics Circle, 147
   105, 187–88, 204, 213, 239                 Pratt, Mary Louise, 51, 162, 180
management: scientific, 4; systematic, 4      Prince, Gerald, 12, 19, 148
Mandy, 28, 37, 39, 60, 75, 79, 91–93, 101,    professional managerial class, 180
   103, 105, 187, 204, 218, 239               professional writing: and civic humanism,
Marla, 42, 63, 82, 105, 176, 187–88, 207,        174; curricula, 127–36; as a field, 33
   219, 239–40                                property, intellectual, 45
Martin, Henri-Jean, 131
Mary, 41–42, 55, 72, 79, 82, 95, 100, 103,    Rachel, 38, 40, 58, 75, 82, 95, 101, 103,
   105, 116, 187–88, 204, 213, 240                187, 207, 216, 242
May, 38, 42, 55, 75, 82, 95, 187, 205, 213,   Ravi, 40–41, 55, 73, 76, 82, 87, 95, 101,
   240                                            187, 207, 214, 242–43
Meese, Ed, 161, 172                           Ray, 40, 58, 73, 82–83, 95–96, 99, 103–5,
Meg, 37, 55, 73, 95, 101, 103, 105, 187,          187, 207, 216, 243
   205, 213, 240                              readability, 11, 144
Megan, 63, 73, 87, 95–97, 100, 187, 205,      reader: implied, 19–20, 144, 148; real, 19–
   219, 240–41                                    20, 148; response theory, 58. See also
Miller, Carolyn, 144, 152, 165                    audience
Miller, James, 69, 70, 143–44                 reading formations, 132, 180
Miller, Susan, 2, 28, 117                     Reagan, Ronald, 172, 192
Miyake, Issey, 162                            Red, 37, 39, 55, 73, 75–76, 79–80, 82–83,
Moylan, Tom, 111, 113                             95–96, 103, 131, 175, 187, 207, 214,
                                                  243
Nancy, 37, 54, 73, 76, 79, 95, 187, 205,      Reich, Robert, 5, 12, 115–16, 119, 129,
   213, 241                                       132–33
narratology, 19–22                            relationality, and social interests, 46, 157
New Criticism, 31                             representational practices, 45–46, 157–58,
Nidean, 15, 20–21, 42, 54, 73, 87, 95, 101,       179–80; and misrepresentation, 98; poli-
   105, 187, 206, 213, 241                        tics and poetics of, xi, 1, 50–52, 65–66,
Norma, 37, 39–40, 73, 95, 98, 187, 206,           161, 182; and “self” and “other,” 113
   214, 241                                   research: grounded, 23; informed intersub-
Nyck, 37, 39, 41, 55, 75–76, 85, 95, 103,         jective methodology, xi, 7; reflexivity
   175, 187, 206, 214, 241–42                     and, 66, 125; teacher, 7; on workplace
                                                  writing, xi, 7
Odell, Lee, and Dixie Goswami, 7              Rex, 39, 55, 73, 82–83, 95, 175, 187, 208,
organization: charts, 5, 168, 172; informa-       214, 243
   tion flows in, 81, 88, 152, 155–56; in     rhetoric: current-traditional, 3; departments
   national context, 5                            of, 3; postmodern, 3
organizational studies, 128–30                Rosaldo, Renato, 1, 156

petits recits, xi, 70–72, 92, 171             Sarah, 39, 41–42, 54–55, 73, 79, 103, 187,
Phelps, Louise Wetherbee, 147, 157, 166          208, 214, 243–44
Phoebe, 38–39, 41, 63–64, 95, 98–99, 105,     Schein, Edgar H., 25, 224
   187, 206, 219, 242                         Selber, Stuart, 134
                                                                                 INDEX    259

self, as constructed through discourses. See     workplace: high-value, x, 5, 108, 115–19,
    discursive constructions, of the “self”         125, 130, 134, 152, 170; high-volume,
self-documentation, 74, 103–4, 121. See             ix, 108; and literacy demands, 45–46;
    also journals                                   managers, 141
Selfe, Cynthia L., 136, 171                      workplace cultures: and alliances, 183; and
Selfe, Cynthia L., and Richard J. Selfe Jr.,        cognitive mapping, 71–72; and “contin-
    124, 167, 173                                   uous quality improvement,” 85; coun-
Silverman, David, and Brian Torode, 123             terproductivity in, 93; and disciplining,
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, 69, 70, 143–44               103; discursive features, 91–108; and
Smith-Bermiss, Michelle, 126                        gender lines, 96; and heterosexism, 101;
social constructionist theory, x, 8, 89             organizational divisions, 96; organiza-
Society for Technical Communication, 33, 115        tional features, 69–90; organizational
Spellmeyer, Kurt, 15, 16, 20, 181                   goals, 86–88; organizational memory,
Starla, 38–39, 55, 69–70, 76, 79, 88, 95,           79; and racism, 93, 101; and sexism, 93,
    135, 156, 175, 187, 208, 214, 244               101, 103; stabilization and change, 84–
subject formation: and autoethnographic sub-        86, 89; subcultural dynamics, 81–84, 89
    ject positions, 50–52, 66; and discourses,   workshops, 121–22, 125
    10, 91–108; and relationality, 121–27        World Bank, 57
subjectivity: as articulated to ideologies,      World Wide Web, 55, 58, 59, 87–88, 95–98,
    123–24; economic, 127; ideological,             135, 146, 170
    124–27, 136; panopticon, 81, 129; po-        writers: and affect, 31, 39, 104, 112, 121–
    litical, 16, 122–24, 136; as positioned in      22; as arbitrators, 147; and “block,”
    interpretation, 50–52, 66, 93; psycho-          122; in Bureau of Labor statistics, 32,
    logical, 16, 17, 121–22, 136; and semi-         44; and collaboration (see collabora-
    otic constructions, 16, 125; as shaped by       tion); and cultural histories and tradi-
    state and surrogate institutions, 17; and       tions, 130–32; as end-user advocates,
    sites, 66–67; sociological, 121–22; stu-        59, 175; and expertise, 5, 108, 140, 149–
    dent, 4, 21, 145; technological, 167;           58, 162; as functionaries, 75–76; and
    theories of, x, 16                              knowledge and behavior, 105–6; as liai-
Sue, 39–40, 58, 73, 79–80, 101, 103–5,              sons to exterior, 76–77; as lookouts,
    187, 208, 216, 244                              175; as mediators, 107; as “mediums,”
Sullivan, Patricia, 11, 22, 32–33, 118, 147         39; as negotiators, 147; as nodes, 135,
symbolic analysts, 115–22, 132, 134–35              157; as an “occupational community,”
                                                    33; and organizational studies, 128–30;
Taylor, Frederick W., 4                             as a professional class, 88, 111–13, 125,
Taylorization: and time-motion studies, 4;          126, 145, 179; profiles of, 134–46; psy-
   and work organization, 4, 5, 12, 44,             chology of, 102–5; as robots, 143–62;
   116, 131, 136, 164                               roles of, 76–78, 88; skills of, 72–74, 89,
Tess, 38–39, 41–42, 55, 57, 82–83, 99, 105,         106; status of, 74–76, 106–7, 140, 162;
   187, 208, 214, 244                               and systems thinking, 129; and turnover,
Tom, 37, 39, 63–64, 95–96, 187, 209, 220,           55, 57; and ways of knowing, 83
   245                                           writing: and autodidacticism, 38; in busi-
Tufte, Edward R., 10                                nesses and corporations, 54–57, 211–14;
                                                    and career change, 42; collaborative (see
usability, 11, 71                                   composition, collaborative); computer-
                                                    mediated, 134–36; and creative/critical
value added, 115                                    binary, 179; and deadlines, 41, 79; dif-
virtual forums, 124–25, 169–71                      ficulty of, 39; and diplomacy, 42; and
voice, 123, 158                                     document design, 73, 145; in educa-
                                                    tional and nonprofit institutions, 62–64,
WAC (writing across the curriculum), 140,           218–20; as eliciting emotions, 40, 43; as
  147                                               encounter with the world, 39; as engage-
260    INDEX

writing, (continued)                                resenting the organization, 135; review
   ment, 39; as exposing oneself, 39; ghost-        processes, 58, 65; and schooling, 38–39;
   writing, 58–59; in government agencies           and skills development, 37; socialization
   and institutions, 57–60, 214–16; and             into, 85; solicitations and acknowledg-
   hypertext composing, 130; impersonal,            ments, 95–96; speeches, 79; and talent,
   4; kinds of, 94–97; as learned, 36–41; as        37; and teaching, 42, 54, 63; teams, 65,
   linked to feelings, 39; as literary author-      76–78, 81, 83, 152, 159, 169 (see also
   ship, 39; as a livelihood, 40; as a mode         composition, collaborative); and tech-
   of learning, 6, 107; as organizational           nology studies, 131; and utilitarian ends,
   product, 97–98; and other people’s meta-         42; and value, x, 115–17
   phors, 73; and other people’s texts, 41;
   as personal, 40; and power, x, 117–19;        Yocom, Margaret “Peggy,” 66, 91
   in professional associations and socie-
   ties, 60–62, 216–18; and project man-         Zebroski, James, and Nancy Mack, 166–67
   agement, 41; and publication, 39; as rep-     Zuboff, Shoshana, 6, 12, 134, 170
Jim Henry holds degrees from Princeton University, the Université de
Genève, the Institut Universitaire d’Etudes du Développement, Webster
University in Geneva, and the University of Pennsylvania. He is an
associate professor of English at George Mason University, where he
develops curricula for the MA program in professional writing and
editing. His essays have appeared in College English and in numerous
professional writing journals.
