09_henry_2000_writing_workplace_ch06_ATTACH.txt — ChatPRD upload (attach this file only)
Generated: 2026-06-28
Slug: henry_2000_writing_workplace
Project: /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/literature/deai-operator-corpus
ChatPRD maximum: 8 uploaded files per window — this file is self-contained.
Also paste: prompts/09_henry_2000_writing_workplace_ch06_ingest.md

========================================================================
STABLE-CONTEXT
========================================================================

PROJECT: deai-operator-corpus
ROOT: /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/literature/deai-operator-corpus/
PIRANESI SIBLING: /Users/dubs/Projects/piranesi.skill/research-projects/0630-deai-operator-corpus/
OPERATOR: Wei Jia · L1 Chinese · ESL fairness mandatory · deai + tic consumer
STAKES: L3 — craft-move bank for all future de-AI and voice passes
PLATFORM: ChatPRD · Opus 4.6 (ingest + synthesis) · Cursor Composer 2.5 (implement from handoff only)

CLOSED-CORPUS IRON LAW
- Run on attached primary text only — no open-web research unless operator explicitly requests gap-fill on [unknown] load-bearing claims.
- Gate A: every Q-001… quote must appear verbatim in attached text export.
- Never invent page numbers; use section anchors from export.

TWO-LANE MANDATE (tag every craft move)
- Lane A deai_removal: remove RLHF residue without flattening voice
- Lane B tic_enrichment: voice priming — structural borrow, not pastiche
- Lane C both: shared craft theory
- [esl_preserve]: keep L1-influenced syntax when not RLHF-corroborated; never "sound more native"

PARENT CANON (inherit — do not re-litigate)
- /Users/dubs/Projects/piranesi.skill/research-projects/0628-deai-signal-removal/deai-signal-removal_decision_canon.md
- /Users/dubs/.cursor/skills/deai/research/deai-tic-voice-craft-canon/decision_canon/deai_tic_voice_craft_decision_canon_20260619.md
- /Users/dubs/.cursor/skills/deai/craft-theory-reference.md
- /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/prompts/literature-paper-ingest.md
- /Users/dubs/Projects/scholia.skill/prompts/literature-chapter-ingest.md

SCHEMA: scholia SF-12 ingest ≤4500 words · palamedes L3 tag grammar · P3 adversarial second-pass

========================================================================
PRIMARY-TEXT (source_exports/chapters/09_henry_2000_writing_workplace_ch06.txt)
NOTE: Chapter slice truncated to 119,000 chars (full chapter at source_exports/chapters/09_henry_2000_writing_workplace_ch06.txt).
========================================================================

chapter 6, and with ideology, since ideo-
logical discourses “work more through selective attention than through
outright suppression” (Rosaldo 87). As discourse workers interpret and
act upon information as it moves between workplace and larger cul-
tures, the representations that they make to themselves of their rela-
tionships to their conditions of existence are always at work, and it be-
hooves us all, as writers and researchers, to probe interplays between
these representations and such intermediation.
    Concerning the effects of organizational authorship on larger cul-
tures and professional writers’ roles in these effects, Mary Beth Debs
offers one scenario:

      In writing, for example, about new products or policy decisions, the writer
      is acting as a spokesperson for the organization in transcribing what is,
      in effect, a preexisting reality (the product or policy developed by the or-
      ganization): It is the company’s message and to a large extent the organ-
      ization’s vision or knowledge that the writer is sending. (166)

In characterizing a writer’s work as “transcribing . . . a preexisting
reality,” Debs sketches a scenario of cultural inscription, of mediation
between the organizational and the discursive effected by writers. Her
selection of “products” as example might prompt us to muse upon the
organizational products and kinds of writing discussed in chapter 5.
Though products such as editorial pages and recruitment brochures
might seem relatively innocuous, inquiries into the ways in which such
products represent internal realities and position external audiences
with respect to these realities by course researchers Jen and Hart, re-
                             REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   157


spectively, reveal the construction of a variety of relations between
organizational cultures and the larger cultures in which they are lo-
cated. In the case of a job announcement newsletter, audiences are
positioned as protégés of the organization; in the recruitment bro-
chures, as young scholars enamored with tradition yet desiring change.
As intermediary agents between organizations and audiences, writers
shape these relations and monitor them to ensure their success—which
in turn guarantees the solvency of the organization. And if we take
relationality as a generative topic in studies of cultural construction and
reproduction, we can ask ourselves how the relations that get shaped
through this mediation among cultures might become in turn foci for
inquiry in the ideological plane: how do the subject positions offered
to audiences through an organization’s discursive representations re-
verberate through larger cultures? What conditions of existence do they
imply and where do these conditions fit in systems of value within or-
ganizations and beyond them?
    In the discursive shards of chapter 5 alone, dozens and dozens of
representations, attendant positions, and relations among them are
suggested; other archaeologies would produce hundreds more. In the
domain of professional authorship, the relations thus established be-
come topics for critique in the ongoing progress of workplace cultures
and critical topics for culture members striving to maintain the solvency
of the organization. In this sense, the roles of “advocate” and “me-
diator” suggested by scholars in professional writing seem vital, since
these roles focus explicitly on the circuits of discursive output and feed-
back and the knowledge that can be constructed in these circuits. These
roles should prompt writers to nurture expertise in demographic in-
terpretation as it can feed such knowledge, to draw on circuits partic-
ular to, say, government writing that position the public as primary
audience reached through complex mediation, and to envision com-
posing for multiple and serial audiences as constructions of self and
other—to recall earlier comments by ethnographic theorist James Clif-
ford and composition theorist Louise Phelps.
    Such constructions of knowledge in the domain of professional
authorship will dovetail with knowledge of oneself as a member of a
professional class in formation as discussed in chapter 6 and with self-
knowledge as a writer whose subjectivity is an in-process construction
amid the discursive structures and practices of given workplace cul-
tures. To enhance this knowledge, writers, as “nodes” and “links”
between organizational cultures and larger cultures, will want to de-
158   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


velop expertise in participating in on-line forums composed of other
writers in other cultures, the better to frame reflections on discursive
selves and others (see Jillian in the appendixes; Selfe and Selfe). In
representing this facet of writers’ expertise in the workplace, writers
and scholars collaborating with them will probably want to point out
that discursive constructions of self and other are not only ethical con-
siderations but considerations in the generation of a culture’s value.

Representing Writing’s Interests
In an individual writing conference with George, he told me of peren-
nial writing classes offered in the military headquarters organization
where he worked. In these classes, expert instructors from outside the
organization would review principles of style and usage and run their
charges through exercises designed to reduce nominalizations, passive
voice, and the like. The classes were fine as refreshers, George claimed,
but nearly all of the writers with whom he collaborated had long since
mastered such fundamentals and rarely wrote in the passive voice or
converted action to stasis in their prose. The reports to which they
contributed, on the other hand, were riddled with such constructions,
and therein lay the rub: problems in style were the result of cultural
processes that included regular obfuscation of agency and disciplin-
ing of inferiors by superiors through discursive intervention that ef-
faced their “voices.” (For a fuller discussion, see Henry and “George.”)
Yet because “writing” in this culture was represented widely as an
individual endeavor (albeit conducted serially in a “chop chain” of
review) and the “work” of discourse as essentially the transmission of
information, the culture’s occasional engagement with discourse in-
struction came in the simplistic form of individual tutelage in prose
style. George’s MA thesis explored this phenomenon in depth, mak-
ing provocative suggestions for local writing practice and instruction
that would make use of reader-response theory and thus exploit one
of the elements of the domain of professional authorship more fully.
His work demonstrates the enormity of the rift between the academy
and the workplace in understandings of discourse and its workings,
and suggests some of the work which remains to be done in represent-
ing the interests of writing in the workplace.
     The most immediate channel for doing so would seem to be pro-
fessional writers who circulate between the two zones. To represent
their expertise in postmodern modes of composing more fully to their
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   159


coworkers, they will need instruction in various aspects of discourse
as outlined in chapter 6 and they will need concrete examples drawn
from their daily work as illustration—hence, once again, the enormous
value of cultivating varying approaches to reflexive practice and to
documenting one’s engagement in collective procedures. Based on such
documentation, professional writers may draw upon teacherly subjec-
tivities to demonstrate ways in which social constructionism takes form
in specific cultures. As they inhabit these teacherly subjectivities (many
made available through discourses with which they maintain connec-
tions), other subjectivities are likely to be offered within organizational
structures, in particular those of managers.
     Lena’s research most directly addressed this aspect of professional
writing. When she interviewed the director of the association where
she was observing document processing and production, the director
lamented the fact that several of the able writers on staff would leave
after a few years, having exhausted possibilities for promotion and for
learning. If they wanted to remain with the organization, she predicted,
their only option would be to move into management. This option is
obviously at work in many cultures, judging by advertisements I receive
regularly from outfits offering seminars in organizational communica-
tions and publishing. Titles such as “publications manager,” “public
relations manager,” “communications manager,” and the like, wrought
in part by the complexities of composition in an informated age, pres-
age organizational positions in which the writer is positioned as a “man-
ager” of discursive production. In such an era, it seems critical that
we represent discursive production as already imbued with complex cul-
tural processes, local and larger, and that we contemplate the ways in
which new “management” positions can heed such representations.
     One possible avenue is through integrating our theory, research,
and instruction on discursive work with Frow’s notion of professional
classes as always classes in formation discussed in chapter 6. Undergird-
ing formations, he suggests, are ideological class relations, in which sem-
iotic constructions of the self take form and in which a sense of self-iden-
tity and identification of the social other emerges. As discussed earlier,
writers’ practices of journaling and reflective commentary on their writ-
ing can enhance work in this sphere enormously. Frow’s juxtaposition
of ideological class relations with political class relations and economic
class relations should prompt us to seize the latter as a highly perti-
nent sphere for representing writing’s interests in workplace cultures.
Precisely because workplace cultures are configured most strongly by
160   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


economic forces, we will need to point out the ways in which these
forces, ultimately concerned most centrally with the production of
value, are inextricably bound to forces and values in the other two
spheres. Now that we have dispensed with notions of writing as purely
transmissive and with discursive work as merely functional, it remains
our task to demonstrate repeatedly the ways in which values in the
ideological sphere relate to values in the economic sphere. As we un-
dertake this work as part of composition’s subject, we will need to
devise strategies in the political sphere, a central topic of chapter 8.
8   INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION
    AND REPRODUCTION

    Roy: How’d you like to go to Washington and work for the
       Justice Department? All I gotta do is pick up the phone, talk
       to Ed, and you’re in.
    Joe: In . . . what, exactly?
    Roy: Associate Assistant Something Big. Internal Affairs, heart of
       the woods, something nice with clout.
    Joe: Ed . . . ?
    Roy: Meese. The Attorney General.
    Joe: Oh.
    Roy: I just have to pick up the phone . . .
                                   —Tony Kushner, Angels in America

    Ito: The chance.
    Grace Jones: To refigure the self.
    Ito: To appropriate.
    Grace Jones: The accoutrements of power.
    Ito: To articulate.
    Grace Jones: A new identity.
                              —Dorinne Kondo, “Bad Girls: Theater,
                 Women of Color, and the Politics of Representation”




                                                                         161
162   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS




In Dorinne Kondo’s performative version of ethnography, Janice Ito,
“a young assistant professor who is thrilled with her new job at the
Mount Olympus of scholarship, Ivy University” (52), team talks with
Grace Jones as the two stroll down a fashion designer’s runway, clad
in Issey Miyake dresses and carrying Uzis. Ito is bent on academic suc-
cess yet struggling with various ideological and pragmatic demands that
go with the job; Jones is her pop idol, suddenly materializing in her
world to serve as both inspiration for her articulation of a politics of
representation and foil to her conceptualization of political identity in
narrowly academic terms. The chance to refigure the self—to articu-
late a new identity—comes to those who inhabit given identities cre-
atively, we glean from Jones’s later comments when Ito objects to Jones’s
having donned a leopard-skin suit and brandished a spear in Conan
the Barbarian.
     As one of the contributions to Behar and Gordon’s Women Writ-
ing Culture, Kondo’s essay takes up the complex issue of the politics
of representation within the field of ethnography, and the character
of Grace Jones in Kondo’s performative ethnography prompts musings
upon autoethnographic projects. As noted in chapter 3, when Mary
Louise Pratt popularized the term in English circles, she defined auto-
ethnography as “a text in which people undertake to describe them-
selves in ways that engage with representations others have made of
them” (35). To articulate a postmodern, feminist, autoethnographic
identity, Kondo’s scene implies, subjects should be prepared to engage
with the identities that specific cultures regularly offer, even if these
identities as initially offered appear objectionable.
     Such is the engagement with identity that the domain of profes-
sional authorship would currently seem to require of professional writ-
ers. That is, given the ready-made subjectivities of “functionary,” “sup-
port staff,” “ghost” (chapter 4), or even “robot” (Slack, Miller, Doak)
that are offered to professional writers most often by workplace cul-
tures where writing is represented as essentially reflective of rather than
constitutive of realities, where discourse is a mode of transmission
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   163


rather than an apparatus for the production of meaning—these repre-
sentations linked to reductionist notions of authorship fostered by both
the academy and by popular media—the most salubrious tactic would
seem to be to engage with such subject positions in order to revise them.
Depending upon the culture and positions that are offered, engagement
may mean little more than putting up with limiting notions of iden-
tity until one can move to a better culture. (This tactic has been voiced
by several of the researchers represented here, particularly those work-
ing in cultures which are customarily the most top-down and constrict-
ing: trade associations.) Such cultures will undoubtedly resist revision
from the bottom up, certainly from one lone agent whose professional
class carries so little clout, which should prod academics who prepare
such agents for their positions to investigate other means of interven-
tion in local cultures and in cultural processes.
     Intervening in cultural processes beyond the walls of the academy
may strike compositionists as foreign, but in professional writing schol-
arship such a mandate has been taking form over the last few years,
leading Rachel Spilka to speak in 1993 of “influencing workplace prac-
tices” through curriculum design and research. That professional writ-
ing scholarship should be the field to forward this mandate derives not
only from its object of study but from the methodologies that have most
informed this study. From the earliest ventures into workplace cultures
by academics in rhetoric and composition, the primary fieldwork meth-
odology has been ethnography (see Odell and Goswami), and at least
two approaches to ethnographic inquiry—applied ethnography and
feminist ethnography—lobby explicitly for intervention in the culture
under study. In “Applied Anthropology and Post-Modernist Ethnog-
raphy,” Agneta M. Johannsen notes that “applied anthropology is
mainly characterized by intervention” (71), observing in the process
that “interpretive anthropology especially focuses on the principle that
to characterize people in any way is to intervene in their lives” (77),
which has been a principle at the heart of feminist anthropology, amply
demonstrated in Women Writing Culture. As professional writing
scholars seeking rigor both in our methodologies and in our position-
ing with respect to epistemologies tied to those methodologies, it makes
perfect sense to recognize intervention in cultural processes as part of
our work.
     It also makes sense to take up the issue of cultural intervention
within the broader landscape of postsecondary curriculum design. To
speak of cultural processes in terms of cultural production and repro-
164   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


duction is to invoke the work of Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Pas-
seron, who in Reproduction in Education, Society, and Culture return
to Bourdieu’s notion of a habitus, “the product of internalization of
the principles of a cultural arbitrary capable of perpetuating itself af-
ter pedagogical action has ceased and thereby of perpetuating in prac-
tices the principles of the internalized arbitrary” (31). Bourdieu and
Passeron use habitus to characterize the ways in which the French
educational system reproduces class distinctions even when federal in-
terventions have been taken to prompt more egalitarian access to high-
status disciplines. Though their interpretations of class formation strike
one as oversimplified in the light of class scholarship since the book’s
publication, their observations on educational institutions’ unwitting
collusion with forces in the sphere of production that reproduce the
status quo are well taken. Such observations implicate curriculum de-
sign and return us once again to the realm of curriculum theory. To
the element of students’ self-actualization as part of curriculum noted
in chapter 6, ethnographic inquiry as framed in this archaeological work
lobbies implicitly for adding social reconstruction (Eisner and Val-
lance), since work at the level of discursive constructions of the sub-
ject always entails work at the level of social systems as intertwined
with discursive processes. Sidelined earlier in the century as invalid
curricular material during the Taylorization of the academy and par-
ticularly of writing instruction, social reconstructionism is likely
to reemerge as cultural forces so closely allied with Taylorization wane
in the informated age.
     As this shift occurs, composition will be positioned to take advan-
tage of it in novel ways by virtue of having taken on discursive con-
structions of subjectivity as one of its foci. In so doing, composition
commits itself to inquiries into the replication of status quo subjec-
tivities within educational institutions and, by extension, to the inter-
ventions necessary to aid students in achieving their maximum self-
actualization. With respect to professional writing, at the very least,
compositionists have a mandate—grounded in this composer-centered
field—to investigate the ways in which status quo subjectivities required
by the workplace in an earlier economic era are replicated through cur-
rent discursive practices, to strive to revise these practices, and to share
these investigations and rationales for revision with students. Primary
to this rationale is the principle that the writing subject has been shaped
dramatically and systematically by current-traditional composition
epistemology and institutional locations of writing instruction that
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   165


sunder “real” selves from their discursive representations in specific
ways—intervening, as it were, in the subject’s range of possible entries
into discourse.
     Countering the effects of this protracted and systematic interven-
tion will require diverse and equally protracted efforts, given the scope
and depth of these earlier forces bearing on discursive subjectivities.
Yet the time for such counterintervention would seem ripe, owing to
at least three developments in the past decade or so: (1) theories for ap-
prehending the complexities of discursive constructions of subjectiv-
ities—of the ways in which the social constructionist elements of lan-
guage and discourse practices shape our identities—have finally made
their ways to composition studies; (2) the shifts in our national econ-
omy, particularly as global capitalism has positioned U.S. economy,
render earlier subjectivities required by the workplace archaic and even
counterproductive; (3) developments in technology have revolution-
ized discursive circuits, opening channels for reshaping subjectivities
and for reimagining rhetorics, as Carolyn Miller’s observations noted
in the previous chapter underscore. I discuss some implications of each
of these factors against the backdrop of this archaeology below.

Discursive Sites of Intervention
The most immediately relevant discursive site for investigation and
intervention is the writing subject. In chapter 6 ideas are presented for
repositioning this subject as part of the larger project of re-presenting
discursive work in the academy. In the pages that follow, these ideas
are extended for their applications in an interventionist approach to
writing subjectivities in the realms of the individual, of a professional
class, and of virtual forums.

Individual Sites

When conceptualized as a site at which social forces struggle to enter
discourse, the “I” of the professional writer stands as a key point in
intervening in cultural reproduction. The erasure of the “I” through
current-traditional composition epistemology has been roundly sec-
onded by workplace discursive practices, judging by the reports of
researchers in this book, rendering this site somewhat inaccessible. Yet
through rethinking authorship as a part of instrumental discourse and
conceptualizing a domain of professional authorship, the purview of
166   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


the professional writer’s “I” becomes clear: “real” authorship entails
“managing” the many contributors to an organizational document (in-
cluding in some cases end users providing feedback) and imagining the
document’s ultimate effects in local and larger cultures, as noted in
chapter 7. Otherwise stated, the “I” of the real author, even when not
evidenced in texts, becomes politically and poetically positioned among
many social forces in extremely complex ways. Intervening in cultural
production and reproduction entails equipping professional writers for
such positioning intellectually in classrooms and collaborating with
them later in the ongoing processes and products in which each “I”
becomes implicated.
     If we ponder Louise Phelps’s observation on the “disappearing
boundary” between authors and audiences and if we accept the valid-
ity of extending to instrumental discourse James Clifford’s observation
that every positing of an “other” in discourse is a simultaneous con-
struction of a “self,” then clearly one of our projects in the academy
must entail assessing various discursive practices and traditions for their
potential in intervention. That is, in addition to imagining courses in
organizational studies and classroom work on students’ “I’s” as ma-
terial, we might comb discursive horizons for practices and traditions
that offer occasions for deconstructing notions of the “I” as an originat-
ing, transcendent ego. Most traditions in English work against such po-
sitioning, paradoxically, which is one reason why collaborative compo-
sition courses hold such promise. But in addition to such courses, we
might nurture course design that makes connections with fields that tra-
ditionally position writers as spokespeople rather than transcendent egos.
     Ethnography and folklore are two such fields, based on my expe-
rience in this archaeological undertaking. While it is true that each of
these fields currently replicates in scholarly publications the “major
author” mode that academic notoriety requires, they nonetheless de-
mand of these authors a cultural validation of tales uncommon in most
English studies: the ethnographer and the folklorist employ method-
ologies explicitly to this end, thus constructing an “author” who is
directly responsible to local cultures. And while Ph.D. writers in these
traditions display such responsibility in writing about cultures, pro-
fessional writers could display such responsibility while writing with-
in cultures.
     We can prepare grounds for interventionist action via the individual
writer by writing such responsibility for cultural validation into our
composition epistemology and practices. James Zebroski and Nancy
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   167


Mack have observed the power of ethnographic writing in heighten-
ing critical consciousness among students; what I am signaling is the
power of such writing for heightening collective consciousness among
all of us who convey fundamental philosophies about writing subjects
through the very conceptualization of courses. My experience in teach-
ing such a course (at the undergraduate level) has taught me that a
recurrent focus becomes that of the writer’s ways and means of vali-
dating observations on a culture. Even writers who do extremely well
in courses positioning them as independent originators of writing have
difficulty learning how and when and why to seek cultural validation
for discourse depicting a culture. In the domain of professional author-
ship, such a discursive identity is indispensable.
     Equally indispensable is an individual identity that assesses the
culture with respect to larger cultures. The politics of representation,
as ethnographers know, requires an ongoing questioning of who speaks
for whom, to whom, and under what conditions. Just as rethinking
ethnography in the postcolonial era has led some ethnographers to eye
the uses of ethnographic representation with vigilance, so might our
course work with individual writers in this tradition foster a similar
vigilance over cultural representations and reproductions via instru-
mental discourse in workplace cultures. Because the workplace culture
is always situated in our larger culture, such vigilance is not only jus-
tified but necessary. The work on ethos cited in chapter 7 speaks to
this issue, as does the burgeoning research on writers’ subjectivities as
shaped by computers. As Cynthia and Richard Selfe observe, “We are
already constituted both as technological and cultural subjects, cre-
ated in part by the machines we ourselves have created and written
continually in our discursive practices on these machines” (352). Part
of our interventionist project as technological and cultural subjects
surely must entail monitoring the contours of individual subjectivity
as technology shapes it, combating the politics of amnesia as we de-
velop our rhetorics from technology. Sharing the knowledge produced
through such monitoring among professional writers, scholars, and
other members of the workplace constitutes an intervention in indi-
vidual subjectivity as compelling as any other in composition history.
     Catherine Belsey speaks of the “displacement of subjectivities
across a range of discourses” (65), and as I scan the lists in chapter 5,
I can imagine the ways in which subjectivities are displaced across some
of the specific discourses of the workplace represented in this archae-
ology. I imagine writers encountering discourses from other profes-
168   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


sional classes and from other intellectual traditions, working to effect
meanings that the professional writer must interpret. When I review
representations of themselves as writers in appendix B, though, they
seem unprepared to theorize relations between displacements and re-
sponsibilities. If we glance through the appendixes further, we can see
that professional writers are quite capable of working within the eth-
nographic writing tradition to produce discursive subjectivities allow-
ing entry to such theorizing. Part of our work in intervening in cul-
tural reproduction should entail our working with these writers to
probe how such writerly subjectivities take form as part of a profes-
sional class.

Class Sites

My work as instructor of Cultures of Professional Writing each term
entailed constructing tables similar to those in appendix B and appen-
dix C so that course participants could see how their work compared
with that of peers and so that they might begin to glean contours of
writers as a professional class. If we are to intervene effectively in cul-
tural production and reproduction, investigating the contours of this
professional class as they solidify and shift is indispensable. Such in-
vestigations can proceed from many points of departure. Depicting the
production of all writers in a course as a set supports in-class discus-
sion of the terms of the set. Whereas I have chosen topics and themes
as valuable to a discussion of organizational and discursive features
deemed pertinent by professional writers engaged in organizational
analysis, one might equally devote tables or charts to the specifics of
whole writing projects undertaken by a group of professional writers.
Doing so would enable even finer discerning of the current scopes of
writers’ purview in the domain of professional authorship.
    Comparing organizational charts across workplace cultures also
supports enhanced understandings of professional writers as a specific
class. Inevitably, these organization charts show writers situated on the
margins of their cultures, or at the lower echelons. Comparing their
positions in workplace cultures with those of professionals from other
classes, along with study of the educational backgrounds and work-
place experiences required (or professed) by other professionals, could
enable a critical consciousness at the level of discursive formations,
which in turn might enable the envisioning of intervention in the name
of a class’s value to the organization. As an individual, it is often dif-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   169


ficult to discern where and how such values are constructed, yet as a
class, such constructions are more easily discernible by virtue of the
relations and recurrent positions rendered visible.
     As a site of intervention in cultural production and reproduction,
the professional class of writers currently offers little leverage in work-
place cultures because of its low status, yet this status could change
with shifts in organization of workplace cultures towards high value.
For those cultures seeking high value configurations to support new
production of knowledge, employing writing as a mode of learning and
discourse as an apparatus for the production of meaning, the profes-
sional class of writer could re-form with greater status and say in cul-
tural production. In his discussion of class formation, John Frow speaks
of class interests as “hypotheses, more or less rationally calculated (or
miscalculated)” (105). As a site of intervention, we might hypothesize
the interests of professional writers as they fit in workplace cultures.
Chapter 6 implies hypotheses in the ideological sphere, grounded in
the symbolic capital with which we provide professional writers and
always already linked to discursive constructions of self and other as
our composition epistemologies enable them. This capital can be par-
layed in the sphere of production when discursive representations are
recognized as a site where not only cultural capital but also economic
capital take form. The political world turns on such a principle, but
perhaps because composition epistemology has for so long eschewed
politics under pretense of neutrality, professionals trained in writing
have been at a loss to identify and act upon political agendas in the
interests of their class.
     Such work would seem to lie before us, and as we undertake it,
we would do well to hypothesize interests that heed all the relations
of the domain of professional authorship. The onus of explaining the
interrelatedness of “users” and “authors” might fall to writers in their
roles as discourse teachers, and to this end it behooves us all to take
up such topics regularly in discursive forums conceptualized not just
for colleagues in the academy but for discourse workers in various
contexts and at various levels. At least one hard-copy forum in which
academics speak to professional writers (and vice versa) on issues of
cultural production and reproduction would be a valuable first step
in hypothesizing this class’s future interests. Virtual forums will be
indispensable, both as means of drawing together writers dispersed
geographically and as means of exchanging information on the moni-
toring of cultural production immediately and at will.
170   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Virtual Sites

If considerations of writers as a class of professionals enhance our
understanding of writer subjectivities through the organizational fac-
tors introduced, then considerations of virtual sites of representation
enhance our understanding of writer subjectivities by expanding the
“organizational” beyond traditional structures. In fact, such expan-
sion may be influencing organizational dynamics in ways unbeknownst
even to organizational players at the tops of organization charts, if
Shoshana Zuboff is correct in her predictions about the ways in which
“informating” is changing the nature of the workplace. That is, even
in the absence of organizational restructuring for high-value produc-
tion (as evidenced by most of the studies in this archaeology), ad hoc
restructuring may be at work through new flows of information. The
fact that organizations already employ software to monitor employee
Internet use in a twenty-first-century enactment of nineteenth-century
panopticism clearly signals new information circuitry. Discursive reach
among workplace culture members, it would seem, has been revolu-
tionized by the Internet in ways still to be explored.
    So have writers’ touchstones for style, judging by Gary’s study of
World Wide Web site maintenance by a job bank and software pro-
vider. With no previous professional writing experience, Gary went to
his site with notions of style garnered from instruction in writing in
the English essay tradition, only to find tantalizing guidelines offered
by “writers” from business and marketing grounded in one principle:
what kind of writing invited and sustained visits to the site. On one
level, such an observation points to the market discourse that drives
many workplace cultures (see chapter 5), yet on another level, the ob-
servation augurs progressive conceptualization of cultural discursive
production that brings audience and users into the authoring process.
By bringing audiences into real authorship of a culture’s discursive
products, one might argue, intervention in cultural reproduction is
made possible in ways hitherto impossible.
    Such scenarios for intervention have existed for some time in the
realm of technical writing via feedback procedures aimed at usability
or readability. It seems inevitable that these scenarios will expand to
other domains, if only by virtue of the cultural porosity enhanced by
the Web. And indeed, major public institutions are increasing “trans-
parency” by placing documents on the Web and integrating them into
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   171


cultural processes. Though the content of these documents is no doubt
carefully screened, the accessibility might in many cases reposition
users, particularly if we think of the government sites represented in
this archaeology (see appendix B). Other possible scenarios include
forums in which outsiders to an organization might post commentary
on that organization’s engagement with respect to the larger culture;
such publications already exist in hard-copy form, of course, but the
Web offers means for collecting and threading them in novel ways.
     Concurrent with such virtual interventions that bring audiences
into authoring in valuable ways will be virtual interventions linked to
the class of professionals known as writers. Now this class can share
information among its constituents concerning their conditions of
existence; writers can represent these conditions to other writers much
in the ways that participants in Cultures of Professional writing have
represented such conditions to one another in flesh and blood. Using
these virtual forums constitutes ideological intervention and invites
contributions from discourse workers in the workplace and the acad-
emy. Cynthia Selfe proposes using forums such as e-mail in ways spe-
cific to intervention in cultural reproduction, to “support discursive
forums that serve to flatten more traditionally constructed hierarchies
in business, organizations, and governments by connecting individu-
als directly to decision makers and to the information used in making
decisions” (258), which dovetails with observations above and else-
where in this archaeology concerning circuits of information flow in
the domain of professional writing. Selfe sees such virtual forums as
part of a larger trend in the postmodern era in which grand narratives
(which always work ideologically through selective attention) are en-
feebled through the multiplication of discourses (and hence alterna-
tive narratives), which in turn offer more opportunities for agency and
resistance (285). Focusing some narratives on the interests of profes-
sional writers as a class, how these interests do and do not connect with
interests of other classes (and indeed with ultimate audiences in the
domain of professional writing), and where and how these relations
figure in values produced and sustained through local cultural work
can perhaps bolster interventions by writers in realms previously ex-
cluded to them. At least some of these narratives should be grounded
in the petits recits such as found in archaeologies, enabling individual
writers, perhaps, to link the petits recits from other locales to their own,
cognitively mapping their positions ever more globally.
172   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Organizational Sites of Intervention
The chapter epigraph from Angels in America is in part about the
construction of exclusive realms through networking, in this case po-
litical networking between New York and Washington in the mid-eight-
ies. The character of Roy Cohn (based on the real-life New York at-
torney and power broker), facing disbarment, needs a well-placed pawn
in the Justice Department to represent his interests—hence his offer
to clerk Joe Pitt. The vituperative Cohn is dishonest, maliciously evil,
and extremely powerful, being well connected within the Republican
Party not only to Attorney General Meese but even via Nancy Reagan
to the President. As the play unfolds and we witness Cohn’s Machia-
vellian tactics, we come to realize, as does the naive Joe Pitt, that Cohn
indeed has only to pick up the phone to place a player in the upper
echelons of a major government organization.
     This representation of political networking manifested by actors
as emanating primarily from the professional class of attorney requires
no willing suspension of disbelief on the part of a Washington audience,
for our days are dappled with similar discursive scenes, be it through
the local press or through occasional unfortunate real-life encounters.
(Edwin Meese, attorney general under President Reagan during the
Iran-Contra debacle and current activist against freedom of speech on
the Internet through his support of the Communications Decency Act,
was named to my university’s Board of Visitors by Republican gover-
nor George Allen; in 1999 Meese became Rector.) In many organiza-
tions in and around the Washington area, particularly those associated
with government or its lobbying, selection, and positioning of huge
numbers of organizational players has much more to do with politi-
cal interests than with relevant expertise. Organization charts that be-
nignly depict these players and positions, never hinting at the interests
or networks behind them, offer little more than faint intimations of
the complexities of organizational authorship.
     Such were the organizations studied by 32 of the 84 researchers
in this archaeology (appendix C). Another 36 studied organizations
in the private sector, where players’ interests are admittedly tied more
closely to market demands, and organizational authorship is thus
shaped by different kinds of politics: here professionals from business
classes and others wield the strongest influence in cultural production
and reproduction. The remaining researchers studied educational in-
stitutions and nonprofits, encountering the political shaping of author-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   173


ship in varying degrees depending upon the topics and themes explored.
Even in this last category, where the play of politics often appears most
innocent, the forces bearing upon organizational authorship as re-
searchers could discern them in just one semester nearly always sug-
gested further lines of inquiry into the interests behind these forces.
(See the abstracts of researchers in this category, along with the topics
and themes they explored in appendixes B and D.)
     The issue of interests as represented through organizational author-
ship cannot be overemphasized, neither as theoretical insights on class
formations as intricately tied to relationality of interests across eco-
nomic, ideological, and political spheres urges empirical inquiry into
the conditions underpinning such relations (see Brodkey, “On the
Subjects”) nor as scholarship in the informated age on professional
writing poses questions not easily answered in an era of shifting orga-
nizational and discursive formations. Computerized composition schol-
ars Cynthia and Richard Selfe pose such questions, and although they
use the title “technical communicators” to designate organizational
writers largely because such writers are most easily associated with
electronic composing, we can substitute the title “professional writer,”
as I have done elsewhere in this archaeology, not only to tap the valu-
able scholarship coming from technical writing but also because the
titles are often used synonymously and interchangeably in organiza-
tional settings. Selfe and Selfe ask:

    To whom are technical communicators responsible? Their corporate
    employers? The public who uses the corporation’s products? The pro-
    fessional societies to which they belong? Who is responsible for the in-
    formation that technical communicators produce? Who controls the in-
    formation technical communicators produce? Why is this so? Whose
    interests are being served in controlling information and in defining the
    various roles and responsibilities of technical communicators in the way
    that we now do? (330)

As inscribers of cultures, managing organizational writing in the do-
main of professional authorship, professional writers are responsible
to large numbers of people in ways that are occluded by current roles
and responsibilities as configured in most organizational settings.
Hence we are not only justified in claiming rights to interventions by
professional writers and their discursive collaborators in cultural pro-
duction and reproduction, we are obligated—even impelled—to do so
in the interest of knowledge both theoretical and utilitarian in an era
174   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


of changing discursive and organizational formations. Deborah Brandt
observes ways in which literacy is always multiply “sponsored,” not-
ing that different kinds of sponsorship construct subjects differently.
If we revisit the sites discussed in chapter 3 and the work and posi-
tions documented in them for the ways that literacy sponsorship is
already shaping subjects, we can imagine interventions (and can hy-
pothesize class interests) to form new unities from this earlier archaeo-
logical work, as follows.
     In commercial organizations (see appendix C), part of writers’
work should entail a philosophical situating of the local culture vis-à-
vis larger cultural trends, as writers manage implied authorship. The
philosophy invoked would be one not only of ethics and civic human-
ism (see Thomas Miller) but also of pragmatism, as the local culture
seeks optimum articulations with norms and values evidenced in larger
and exterior cultures. Even in businesses such as public relations firms,
whose sole raison d’être is the discursive representations of outside
clients, organizational authorship entails negotiating these represen-
tations in consumer cultures. Because such cultures are always imbued
with mediations of representations emanating from other sources, the
professional writer must select and deploy clients’ representations ju-
diciously. Otherwise stated, the writer engages in ideological work, and
intervention in such work entails at the very least theorizing the terms
of selection and deployment.
     As an example, Ann, who works as a writer for a public relations
firm, extended her work in Cultures of Professional Writing into an
MA thesis, in which she explored the processes whereby an all-female
business shaped the voices of all-male clients for various media. Her
inquiry naturally took her to feminist theory and works such as Belenky
et al.’s Women’s Ways of Knowing in order to depict the kinds of
knowledge about discursive forms that she and her colleagues had built
over the years and to contrast this knowledge with that of their cli-
ents. Part of their work entailed teaching their clients about discursive
features in the realm of public relations, and herein lies great potential:
as we collaborate with such writers through academic liaisons, the
theories we harken to imply specific kinds of responsibilities, relation-
ality, and alliance with other groups, defined in part by professional
class and also by gender, race, and other traits.
     The interests of such groups might enter the domain of professional
authorship via the circuits open to users, consumers, and other audi-
ences implicated in organizational authorship. As such, interventions
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   175


by professional writers may well entail taking the position of “advo-
cate” cited earlier. If we recall Jeff’s discovery through his interviews
with engineers that technical editors in his culture were unwittingly un-
dermining the engineers’ authority by unstringing noun strings, we can
imagine future scenarios in which those noun strings might indeed need
to be unstrung for interpretation by a nonengineering audience. In the
role of advocate for audiences (and end users), his editing work could
even entail pursuing questions and objections raised in their interests
(or that he would anticipate in their interests) within the organization.
     Alongside the role of advocate might be considered the role of
lookout—as writers positioned as nodes or links with extraorgani-
zational cultures scan discursive horizons for information and knowl-
edge that shapes the local culture. Starla’s job of clipping daily news
items she deems relevant to her organization represents a form of in-
tervention with great potential, depending upon the ways in which
organizations position these writers in information flows and the ways
in which educational institutions prepare them intellectually.
     Professional writers might also intervene in those cultural processes
that are more self-contained within an organization. Some research-
ers in business cultures studied in this archaeology have already done
so, either literally through discursive intervention or philosophically
through themes addressed in their organizational analysis: Nyck com-
posed formal policy regarding employees’ duties and rights and had it
instituted at his office, and Red harkened in his ethnography to news-
paper industry traditions being scuttled at his newspaper through the
introduction of time clocks for reporters. Rex noted ways in which
discursive practices reinforced certain organizational structures at his
site of study, thus implying possible interventions by writers should
those structures support counterproductive values, and Lisa similarly
identified a reproduction of cultural values through discursive prac-
tice. In her final ethnography, she states: “Since discursive practice is
defined as rationalizations used for the production of meanings, it
would then follow that the editing process is yet another set of ratio-
nalizations for rationalizations previously constructed (the written
text)” (12).
     We can imagine similar conceptualizations of intervention in gov-
ernment agencies and institutions as depicted in appendix C. Seeing
these conceptualizations through to realization might prove more dif-
ficult, given the frequent layers of bureaucracy and politically moti-
vated decisions. George’s insightful suggestions for introducing some
176   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


instruction in reader-response theory at his military headquarters or-
ganization as an alternative to the pointless instruction in prose style
went unheeded, yet it remains a valuable intellectual intervention as
we elaborate our understandings of organizational authorship and ways
of integrating audiences into authoring circuits. Other researchers in
government settings conceptualized similar frameworks for interven-
tions in discursive practices: Helen through her analysis of magazine
editors’ construction of implied authorship as replicating certain cul-
tural norms and values, and Gloria through a similar analysis of im-
plied authorship in correspondence composed across divisions at the
Library of Congress. Pragmatic interventions in such sites will undoubt-
edly require sustained efforts on the part of professional writers, per-
haps in concert with professionals from other classes, which is all the
more reason to cultivate connections with these classes under the ae-
gis of shared values.
     In the trade associations represented in appendix C, intervention
seems relatively unfeasible, except when writers are positioned such
as Kyle was to solicit and edit articles for the association’s publications
with a fair amount of license. But as noted earlier, his professional pur-
view as a writer was the exception rather than the rule in this category
of workplace. More often, content of even the most mundane nature
is carefully monitored, owing to the hegemony of political discourse
in local practices, and if writers and their allies are to conceptualize
intervention, their efforts would be better placed in intellectual inter-
ventions by writers in their own discursive, theoretical, and political
understandings—since in most cases they will leave such workplaces
for better employ after short stints.
     Finally, the category of educational institutions as organizational
sites for intervention strikes most closely to home for those of us with
a direct stake in the goals of these institutions. Writers’ work and posi-
tions in these institutions as depicted in appendix C lobby for inter-
vention in curriculum design and classroom practices, of course, yet
they also lobby for intervention in extracurricular circuits (see the ab-
stracts of Alice, Emma, Jillian, Julie, Lee, and Marla). To do so, one
might draw upon the work of Anne Ruggles Gere on the “extracur-
riculum,” which identifies the need for academics investigating and
teaching discursive practices in classrooms to learn from the practices
of grassroots community writing groups, formed in the name of a cause.
She says: “As we consider our own roles of social agency we can insist
more firmly on the democracy of writing and the need to enact peda-
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   177


gogies that permit connections and communication with the commu-
nities outside classroom walls” (91). Her stance is echoed by James
Slevin in terms of the very disciplinarity of composition studies:

    At the heart of the educational practice I propose is a reconceptualizing
    of disciplinarity so that its intellectual work is located in encounters with
    students and in the projects that arise from these encounters. What we
    need is a sense of disciplinary work that supports and even makes pos-
    sible these developments, a sense of “discipline” that allows literacy work-
    ers (teachers and students) in various institutional sites (academic and
    nonacademic) to feel the importance of what they do and to recognize
    their connections with one another. (160)

     Intervention, along such lines, would entail deconstructing the
philosophical boundaries that accompany the institutional boundaries
of our colleges and universities in ways that admit and legitimize in-
strumental discourse elaborated in workplace cultures. Such interven-
tions have already been proposed—perennially, in fact—yet usually in
ways that suggest the kinds of collusion in cultural reproduction dis-
cussed in the chapter introduction. The interventions I refer to valorize
instrumental discourses as topics of critical analysis to be undertaken
in the elaboration of writing formations. As such, they will position
their students not as uncritical subjects but as future inscribers of work-
place cultures, tasked with the enormous responsibility of scrutiniz-
ing the discourses and discursive practices implicated in such inscrip-
tion for the norms and values they produce and reproduce.
     To ignore this extracurriculum is tantamount to political suicide
for discourse workers, given the recent trends at the national level
among students towards undertaking postsecondary education con-
current with work. At my state university, for example, the majority
of students support themselves partially through jobs and take five or
six years to complete an undergraduate degree. Recent federal subsi-
dies for similar structuring of tertiary education in community colleges
augurs similar scenarios which, when considered alongside the num-
bers of people pursuing advanced degrees in discourse studies while
holding full-time jobs, compels us to theorize this situation. Such en-
gagement dramatically limits a person’s time and opportunities for edi-
fication in cultural issues or for civic engagement, which renders Mary
Beth Debs’s suggestion in chapter 4 that the organization has become
the major arena for public life for the individual in modern Western
civilization simultaneously tantalizing and ominous. With the increased
178    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


speed in cultural processes effected through computers, political impli-
cations of the products of authorship can be easily overlooked, mean-
ing that whether or not we admit it, writers in workplace cultures are
engaged in political work by default. Surely, it behooves us to investi-
gate the discursive contours of this work in the academy.
     In tandem with technological developments, other cultural pro-
cesses have increased in speed, including those processes that make use
of professional writers in a post-Fordist era of flexibility. The flexibil-
ity of labor produced by recent national economies clearly benefits org-
anization players at the upper echelons at the expense of those in lower
positions (Harvey). If we are to align ourselves epistemologically and
politically with discourse workers whom popular (and academic) ide-
ologies would position in these lower positions as functionaries, then
it becomes our work to take up intervention in cultural production and
reproduction as part of our job as compositionists, cultural scholars,
and certainly as academics in professional writing. If we do not, scenar-
ios such as the one composed by Kali, based on her real-life witness-
ing of hiring and firing and enacted by course participants during a
writing workshop, could well become a recurrent tale among profes-
sional writers. Her scenario depicts a Kafkaesque culture in which
writers are fired and (perhaps) rehired so frequently through manage-
ment snafus that they are inured to termination:
      Kali: Here’s the setting: battleship-grey walls with rose flecks that are
         an attempt to add cheer but end up looking like blood stains. The
         floor plan is obviously cubes, but they’re attached in such a way as
         to resemble a maze as well. Everyone is walking around holding
         clipboards. Alan enters in a whirl, like a Tasmanian devil.
      “Alan”: Has anyone seen Mary? I need to find Mary. I need to fire
         Mary. I don’t want to, but someone upstairs messed up and I have
         to. Tell Mary I’m looking for her.
      [he exits; Mary enters]
      “Mary”: Has anyone seen Alan? He needs to fire me so I can get back
         to work. I need to get all this done before I go.
      [Alan reenters]
      Alan: Mary. There you are. You’re fired.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: I don’t want to be the one to tell you but I have to.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: It’s nothing you’ve done.
      Mary: I know.
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   179


    Alan: You’re a great employee.
    Mary: I know.
    Alan: Three weeks.
    Mary: I know.
                                                   —discussion in class, 4/9/97


Reforming Discursive Formations and Recapturing
Intellectual Dominion
In this workshop, Kali’s fictional scene was conducted as a class ac-
tivity in tandem with discussions of Dorinne Kondo’s ethnography cited
in the chapter epigraph. The workshop was suggested by guest scholar
Zofia Burr, who melds poetry writing with critical writing in construct-
ing her scholarship, which is otherwise grounded strongly in African-
American studies, women’s studies, and cultural studies. In introducing
herself to the class, she stressed that she saw the dichotomy “creative
writing/critical writing” as a false dichotomy against which she strug-
gled, and the workshop produced provocative “plays” of the kind cited
above that bore out her argument. Writers worked both creatively with-
in the approach of performative ethnography proposed by Kondo and
critically against the backdrop of a semester’s fieldwork and analysis
in a given workplace culture. Our goal in the workshop, much like the
goal in Kondo’s essay, was to shift momentarily to another mode of
composing in the interest of gleaning something about underlying re-
lations in culture. As Professor Burr put it:
    The live experience [of a staged scenario] really models for you the kind
    of problem you have as a writer to begin with: How are people who are
    situated in different places going to get into this? How am I going to
    represent people situated differently from myself? All of that. It’s all about
    being in relation. And the thing about figuring a drama, as opposed to
    figuring a poem, is that you really do think about bodies in relation to
    each other saying things that are potentially defining. (in class, 4/9/97)

In Kali’s scene above, the exchange between Alan and Mary is poten-
tially defining of the whole class of professional writers if we don’t in-
tervene to reconstruct composition epistemologies and liaisons among
discourse workers that recognize and theorize the creative and critical
elements of composing instrumental discourse. Through their discursive
work, professional writers daily reproduce (and potentially reconfig-
ure) the terms of being in relation in their specific culture, yet because
180   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


we have been remiss in recognizing such socially constructive acts for
the inscription of culture that they are, writers such as Mary find them-
selves wholly expendable. With the rise of the professional managerial
class (see Harvey) has come a construction of organizational author-
ship in which those most versed in writing find themselves most dis-
tanced from authoring by their lack of authority. As discourse work-
ers, we should seek to reclaim this dominion for fellow writers, and
we should concurrently reshape writing formations critical to exercis-
ing authority and responsibility in the domain of professional writing.
     We can begin by connecting curricular writing formations of pro-
fessional writers with reading formations such as discussed in chapter
6 to the ends of producing writers who are creative in their construc-
tions of reality via instrumental discourses and are equipped with theo-
ries and cultural awareness of the most critical sort. If I have seemed
overly dismissive of courses in which students write to an instructor
about literature and other texts, I should emphasize here that I see such
work as crucial, given the imbrication of reading formations and writ-
ing formations. When such courses are conceptualized as complemen-
tary to the constructions of writing formations rather than constitu-
tive of them, they can aid writers enormously. Indeed, invaluable work
takes place in courses with carefully selected texts and contextu-
alization that enables situating these texts amid cultural (and multicul-
tural) processes past and present. Courses such as those described by
Richard Miller or Phyllis van Slyck, in which the classroom setting is
construed as a “contact zone” in which the cultures coming into the
classroom with students become a part of curricular material, enable
negotiations of representations and repositionings in light of multiple
theories and multiple perspectives among those students. Such read-
ing formations can link with writing practices in valuable ways, as writ-
ers in organizational settings tap discursive theories and experiences
to make decisions in the ongoing inscriptions of workplace cultures.
     When scholars and educators such as Miller and van Slyck use the
term “contact zones,” they invoke the autoethnographic project, since
the term became popularized by Mary Louise Pratt in the same essay
that transported autoethnography from anthropological to literary cir-
cles. And indeed, spatial tropes have often been employed to depict dis-
cursive work under the postmodern umbrella, since one feature of post-
modern discourse is that of border crossings. These tropes have enabled
insight in particular with respect to cultural differences grounded in
ethnicity and regionality, for example, for obvious reasons: particu-
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   181


larly if students from various “zones” are present in one classroom,
experiences and interpretations emanating from these zones can be
aired. But a similar task with respect to professional class is more dif-
ficult to accomplish, both because most students in most classrooms
are not yet fully vested members of those classes and because academic
structures are such that once class formation does begin with special-
ization, students encounter only students of their own specialization
and class in formation.
     It would seem that we need tropes to complement autoethno-
graphy’s “zones” for conceptualizing and engendering exchanges be-
tween the academy and the workplace in the name of cultural inter-
ventions and under the aegis of authorship in instrumental discourse.
Because the “zone” has proven a productive trope and perhaps to ar-
ticulate more easily the knowledge generated through this trope, we
might think in terms of “space,” particularly in an age of virtuality
and its forums. Working within the philosophical tradition, Jacques
Derrida has spoken of a “becoming space” that Patti Lather draws
upon in conceptualizing inquiry that bridges postmodern and feminist
theory: “A science capable of grasping the continual interplay of agen-
cy, structure, and context requires a ‘becoming space’ . . . where we
can think and act with one another into the future in ways that both
mark and loosen limits” (101). Forming such a space, against the work
of this archaeology and in pursuit of bringing to organizational au-
thorship the theoretical and pragmatic attention it deserves, would
require players from both academic and workplace contexts construct-
ing theories of practice that explore the interplay of both structure and
agency in the processes and products of authorship. Kurt Spellmeyer
has asked, “Are we prepared to recognize nonspecialists as genuine
collaborators in the making of knowledge?” (“Inventing the Univer-
sity Student” 44), and this archaeology answers his question with a
resounding “We must.” Collaborating genuinely—thinking and act-
ing with one another—will of a necessity entail inspecting the terms
of “being in relation” of which Zofia Burr speaks, which should push
us relentlessly—as members of the class of discourse workers—towards
mapping the continual interplays among the ideological, productive,
and political spheres shaping our being and in which cultural values
take form.
     Tony Bennett has spoken of “strategic interventions within the
operating procedures and policy agendas of specific cultural institu-
tions” (32), and while he is thinking more of interventions among
182   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


players from a variety of professional classes usually positioned in more
powerful positions than writers in organizations, his appeal applies to
professional writers in their day-to-day inscriptions of culture. As we
take steps to enhance the theorizing of and ongoing empirical research
in organizational authorship and as we conceptualize new reading and
writing formations to prepare discourse workers for their positions, we
would do well to acknowledge the lack of political impetus to act that
we have provided to date. Such a lack looms large, given the degree to
which we have shaped political interpretations in reading formations
in recent years. Kondo’s play is illustrative: the character of Janice Ito
is invited by Grace Jones to try on the accoutrements of power, which
we realize can be little more than a temporary fitting for Ito in current
political arenas. Compared with the character of Roy Cohn in Kush-
ner’s play, at least, the real political clout of Ito is negligible.
     As for Cohn, he is facing not only disbarment but also his impend-
ing death, though he refuses to admit it. He has contracted AIDS
through homosexual sex, we glean, yet he forbids his doctor during
the diagnosis (under threat of destroying the doctor’s practice) even
to pronounce the word “homosexual,” since such a representation of
Cohn in his circles of power would mean his undoing. Thus Angels in
America informs us not only about political networking to construct
and maintain realms of exclusion but also about the politics of repre-
sentation. Reading the play in 2000, in the age of protease inhibitors
that offer extended life until perhaps even a cure for AIDS is found
for people infected with HIV, we remember the early years of the plague
in which the play is set and the pointed refusal of the Reagan admin-
istration to respond quickly to this disease. Gay interpretations of this
refusal point to the equation of AIDS with homosexuals in the mid-
eighties and long-standing homophobia in the Republican Party which
condoned gay genocide through selective inattention. Had interven-
tions in research, treatment, and education occurred earlier, such in-
terpretations argue, many who have died might still be among us, and
the epidemic that now sweeps the world might have been mollified.
     The character of Cohn illustrates a particular kind of politics of
representation, in which personal gain or the gain of a select group is
inordinately augmented by blocking comprehensive and multidimen-
sional interpretations of social facts. Such interpretations have long
been at the core of feminist theory, African-American studies, gay stud-
ies, cultural studies, and others, yet the power suggested through such
reading formations hasn’t been connected with writing formations. One
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   183


of the reasons for this failure is that for all of the work in the ideologi-
cal sphere, the political sphere has been pretty much ignored—while
the sphere of production is positioned as some kind of afterlife to which
academics have neither interest nor purview. In so doing, composi-
tionists have repeated an “innocence about power” (Berlin, Rhetorics
80) which has consistently plagued composition epistemologies. Yet
when we rethink ideological constructions of authorship through the
ages and institutional enactments of composition that relay current-
traditional epistemology, the spheres of production and politics loom
as terribly neglected elements in the approach to discursive construc-
tions of subjectivity. Surely one solution to this problem is through the
establishment of a political action arm of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication, as Sharon Crowley argues (240).
     One of the effects of the institutional departmentalization of com-
position into English earlier in the century, to recall the argument in
chapter 1, was that the relationship of mentor between professors and
students was severely undermined, since professors now found them-
selves with so many students from outside of their field and the pro-
fessorate was being pushed towards research in the academic rationalist
tradition—that is, publications on their own topics of interest, often
rarified and esoteric—thus limiting energy and time that could be in-
vested in mentoring. As we refashion composition epistemology and
imagine new institutional forms adequate for apprehending the com-
plexities of organizational authorship, certainly we will want to redress
this positioning of professor and students. Probably the identity of
“mentor” will prove inadequate, since student writers (who will of-
ten be simultaneously workplace writers) will be bringing experiences
and expertise into the classroom which will in fact constitute much of
the curriculum—and so we must seek new relationships adequate to
our task.
     We will want to seek new relationships (and alliances) with stu-
dents and professors from other professional classes, too, given that
many of these people are deeply implicated in discourse work, in spe-
cific ways owing in part to their disciplining, in part to the contexts,
and in part to the contours of the classes in formation to which they
belong. Occasions for many other kinds of archaeological digs will
present themselves, and it behooves us to nurture them as they might
enable writers to act in their workplace cultures with greater and
greater sophistication and political savvy. If, with Branden and with
all other discourse workers with whom we explore organizational au-
184   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


thorship we seek to foster a critical relationship with our own dis-
course, we will need to explore relentlessly the ways in which individual
discourses meet with structures and practices in situ. Not to do so is
to succumb to reductionist ideology in our own fields and by extension
in our own lives. When we imagine the becoming spaces that we will
create to mark and loosen discursive limits, we might take one archaeo-
logical shard as talisman, Leigh’s comment that she “always wants
writing to be part of her life” (appendix B), a life, like all of our lives,
that will be increasingly composed by the workplace cultures that writ-
ers write.
APPENDIXES

WORKS CITED
INDEX
Appendix A
RESEARCHERS’ PROFESSIONAL WRITING BACKGROUNDS
Organizational Print Publications (including editors, copy editors,
editorial assistants)
    1993: Bernie, Challie, Itsy, Jan, Kolar, Nancy
    1994: Hart, Jen, Leigh
    1995: Brenda, Daisy, Grace, Helen, Karla, Kelly, May, Phoebe, Tess
    1996: Diane, Holly, Kyle, Nyck, Starla, Sue
    1997: Adam, Chet, Corinne, Lena, Maggie, Mary
    1998: Heather, Jackie
    1999: Anita, Ella, Ginger, Jane, Meg

Public Relations/Policy
    1994: Ann
    1995: May
    1996: Andrew, Ray
    1997: Carolyn, Lena
    1998: Kirsten

Technical Writing/Technical Editing (includes Web site design and writing)
    1993: Ellie, Jeff, Joe, Rex
    1995: Sarah, Tom
    1996: Albert, Norma
    1997: Ana, Carolyn, Chet, Kali
    1999: Adria, Anita, Amy, Joanne, Leathe

Analysis Writing and Correspondence
    1993: George, Lisa, Mandy
    1994: Cass, Hart, Liz, Rachel
    1995: Gloria, Tom
    1996: Andrew, Lois, Starla
    1998: Megan, Ravi
    1999: Leathe

Research Writing
    1993: George
    1995: Gloria, Gwen

Journalism
    1993: Nidean
    1995: Daisy, Karla, Kelly, Marla
    1996: Mack, Red


                                                                             187
188    APPENDIX A

Journalism (continued)
      1997: Carolyn, Maggie
      1998: Jackie

Teaching
      1993: Anne, Lisa
      1994: Lee
      1995: Kelly, Marla
      1996: Alice, Jihad, Kate
      1997: Chet, Elaine, Janice, Julie, Lara

Graphic Design
      1993: Challie
      1997: Mary

Freelance, Self-Employed Writing
      1993: Branden
      1997: Janice

Academic Writing (solely)
      1995: Jillian
      1997: Gary
Appendix B
RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS,
SITES OF RESEARCH, AND RESEARCH TOPICS AND THEMES

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Adam                    Worked as a                 Publishing         “Customer service”;
Editing                 contributing                company            morale; turnover;
                        editor for arts                                isolation, alienation of
                        and entertain-                                 department within
                        ment magazine;                                 company
                        good at inter-
                        viewing and
                        incorporating
                        quotes; good at
                        dialogue; prone
                        to agonizing; uses
                        deadlines; needs
                        practice

Adria                   Creative writing            Military           Socialization, modes of
Technical               undergraduate               contractor         communication, high
writing                 degree; technical                              turnover, visibility of
                        writing career                                 technical writers’ work
                        means learning
                        technical
                        knowledge;
                        enjoys document
                        design, end-user
                        documentation;
                        designs Web
                        pages and
                        corporate
                        literature;
                        agonizes over
                        phrasing, fears
                        sounding stilted;
                        “my academic
                        writing . . .
                        sounds strange”

Albert                  Development in              Government         Virtual workplace and
Technical               high school                 think tank         split subjectivity,
writing,                advanced                                       representations of self,
World Wide              placement                                      writer as go-between,
Web writing             English; influence                             accountability


                                                                                                    189
190    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Albert                  of college pro-
(continued)             fessor; better
                        writing when
                        not nervous
                        about risks;
                        mainly e-mail
                        now; in charge
                        of public image
                        of organization;
                        functional
                        writer—observe,
                        experience, write;
                        humorous
                        narrator

Alice                   Early develop-              Fourth-            Research projects and
Teaching,               ment; journals,             grade              multicultural issues;
academic                storytelling,               classroom          library’s lacunae,
writing                 poetry; writes and                             parents’ books;
                        reads for students                             nonnative speakers and
                        and publicly;                                  literacy roles
                        interest allows
                        immersion;
                        challenge of
                        research

Amy                     “Never thought              Electronics        E-mail communica-
Technical               of myself as a              representa-        tions, shaping cultural
writing                 writer”; writes             tive               norms and values
                        Powerpoint
                        presentations,
                        Web pages, and
                        brochures; enjoys
                        letter writing;
                        “enterprising”;
                        wants to improve
                        as a writer

Ana                     Technical writing           Military           Gender, race, and
Technical writer        for military                contractor         organizational status
                        contracts;                                     and position;
                        woman, minority,                               document review,
                        and non-techie in                              budgets; technical
                        military-industrial                            writer’s knowledge
                        complex (status
                        through English
                        degree); writes
                        fiction in personal
                        life for release,
                        satisfaction,
                        development
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             191

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Andrew                  Career change;              Campus             Formalization of
Policy and              experience in               police             policy, training,
public                  reading and                 department         remodeling of culture,
relations               writing of pro-                                control of information
writing                 gram proposals,
                        procedural
                        initiatives, and
                        speeches, in
                        addition to
                        editing and
                        proofreading;
                        would like to
                        write for an
                        association,
                        public relations;
                        grammar and
                        writing served
                        earlier career
                        (writing as
                        valuable pro-
                        fessional skill)

Anita                   A “writer-in-               Maritime           Meetings and writing
Technical               progress”; handle           office             projects, efficiency,
writing                 topics coherently,                             communications
                        in an organized
                        format; “soup-
                        maker,” present-
                        ing other people’s
                        information;
                        good ear, weak in
                        rules of grammar;
                        fun with words
                        and ideas

Ann                     Not a “writer”              Public             Instruction in writing;
Public                  (“public relations          relations          organizational function
relations               specialist”);               company            of lessons; all women;
writer                  writing equals                                 “feminine”; status;
                        poetry or liter-                               voice, vocabulary
                        ature, “publica-
                        tion”; satisfaction
                        seeing writing in
                        print; two types
                        of writing; pro-
                        fessional: news-
                        letters, press
                        releases, brochure
                        copy (creativity,
                        scrutiny, frus-
                        tration); personal:
                        proposals for
                        nonprofits (satis-
                        fying, purpose,
                        responsibility,
                        pride)
192      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Anne                    Teaching as a               Boys’ prep         Personal/academic
Video-                  profession                  school             writing, gender roles
grapher,                perhaps an error            English class
full-time               (job market);
student                 narrator
                        questions the self-
                        analysis
                        instrument

Bernie                  High school                 Professional       Topics for organiza-
Editor                  writing as                  association        tional publications,
                        expressive outlet;          headquarters       linear and lateral
                        self-satisfying;                               thinking, lobbying
                        more effective
                        form of commu-
                        nication than
                        speech; writing
                        vs. other
                        professions

Branden                 High school                 Government         Documents as
Independent             writing influen-            travel             possessions in
tourism                 tial; equates               agency             bureaucracy
writer                  writing with
                        Shakespeare;
                        published widely;
                        selling her writing

Brenda                  Developed early             Association        Magazine editing and
Press and               (age eleven);                                  review processes, Post-
professional            writing is fiction,                            its, editors’ review
writing                 a certain length;                              styles
                        finds it easy,
                        enjoyable; process
                        involves trans-
                        lating, solving
                        puzzles; some-
                        times humdrum;
                        motivated by
                        deadlines; looks
                        forward to re-
                        sponse; schooling;
                        following a
                        project

Carolyn                 Values essential—           Information        Communication gaps
Technical               must believe in             technology         between departments,
writer,                 document; enjoys            consulting         influence of gaps on
journalism              writing to educate          company            writers’ performance
                        (experience as
                        feature writer);
                        experience in
                        interviewing;
                        currently working
                        collaboratively on
                        a user’s manual
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             193

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Cass                    Excelled in                 Government         Director’s manage-
Contract                research papers in          agency             ment of projects, fax,
writer,                 high school;                                   communications,
government              writing commer-                                government
                        cials for radio;                               hierarchy, employee
                        seven years                                    affect
                        preparing docu-
                        ments for
                        government
                        contracts (coor-
                        dinating requests
                        for proposals;
                        memos, board
                        reports, research
                        ideas); pursuing
                        MA in teaching
                        of writing and
                        literature to teach
                        composition or
                        technical writing
                        eventually

Challie                 More comfort-               Professional       E-mail message
Graphic                 able with creative          association        types, Continuous
designer                than technical              headquarters       Quality Improvement
                        writing; capable                               in organization,
                        yet difficulty                                 efficiency through e-
                        implementing                                   mail, performance
                        ideas

Chet                    Needs improve-              Govern-            Deadlines and
Editing                 ment in writing             ment-related       quality; teamwork,
                        skills; interest/           publishing         cooperation, sacrifice
                        passion for this            company
                        art form;
                        mediocre in
                        nonfiction,
                        poetry, technical
                        writing; have
                        “verbal acuity”;
                        likes writing
                        fiction most, but
                        earning a living?

Corinne                 Difficulty con-             Public             Restructuring and
Editing                 veying emotion as           relations          editing, perpetuating
                        an editor; investi-         office of          image, old produc-
                        gative, artistic,           historic           tion practices
                        organizer; func-            house
                        tional skills:
                        cultivating,
                        problem solving,
                        producing,
                        collaborating,
                        administering,
                        scheduling
194    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Daisy                   Journalism, news            Newsroom           “Live” culture vs.
Journalism,             releases, public            of biweekly        textbook, observed
public                  service announce-                              quietness in the field
relations,              ments, brochures,                              site, experience,
editor                  features; others’                              interactions
                        evaluations of
                        her; enjoyment;
                        writing poetry
                        provides ful-
                        fillment; dead-
                        lines; early
                        development;
                        goal to teach

Diane                   “Conventional               Education          Strategic planning in
Organization            organizer, artistic         association        “disheveled” culture,
publications            creator, social             headquarters       publication processes,
editing                 helper” (Holland);          (communi-          management vs.
                        undergraduate               cations            writers and editors,
                        training in jour-           department)        turnover
                        nalism; perhaps
                        more an editor
                        than writer;
                        satisfaction in
                        effecting results

Elaine                  When writing, a             Corporate          One script’s evolution,
Academic,               good writer (“ele-          history            academic/corporate
newsletters             gant simplicity”);          writing            views of writing,
                        needs audience              company            should/can this com-
                        and deadline,                                  pany do advertising?
                        though (why her
                        novel remains
                        unfinished);
                        juggling mother-
                        hood and writing;
                        great emphasis on
                        page one in com-
                        posing; newslet-
                        ters; emotional
                        high from
                        crafting words

Ella                    Assemble note-              Law office         Managing documenta-
Legal                   books, design                                  tion for outside client:
support                 databases, orga-                               volumes of old docu-
writing                 nize, summarize;                               ments, drudgery, lack
                        no creativity,                                 of autonomy
                        presently; still
                        developing;
                        importance of
                        proofreading;
                        adapted style
                        (shorter sen-
                        tences); creating
                        family Web pages
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             195

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Emma                    High school                 Elementary         Teachers’ and
Teaching                training in                 school             administrators’
                        “notecards and                                 writing; hierarchy,
                        outlines”; later,                              distance, tensions
                        “writer-based”;
                        still later, “audi-
                        ence issues”;
                        not a “gifted”
                        analytical writer,
                        so uses lots of
                        drafts and hard
                        work

Gary                    Early develop-              Internet job       Writing and editing by
Academic                ment (grade                 bank               “non-writers,” new
                        school); enjoys                                issues in writing
                        researching,                                   brought by Internet
                        drafting, and
                        revising; enjoys
                        poetry and
                        creative writing;
                        doesn’t call self
                        writer (“true
                        writers write all
                        the time”);
                        methodical,
                        precise

George                  Childhood                   Military           Ghostwriting,
Writer/editor           writing; high               headquarters       document review
(fourteen               school contest;             organization       procedures, writer
years)                  occupational                                   psychology, readability
                        pleasure is clear
                        and useful
                        writing

Ginger                  Personal writing            Law office         Legal culture,
Legal                   is journals,                                   drudgery, humor,
support                 poetry, letters,                               sarcasm
writing                 e-mails, classes,
                        editing others;
                        professional
                        writing is legal-
                        secretarial,
                        revisions,
                        collaborative,
                        never originated
                        by self; strong in
                        grammar,
                        sentence
                        structure;
                        “pride”; future
                        goal to be editor
                        or technical
                        writer
196    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Gloria                  Innovation, ex-             Library of         Reference correspon-
Professional            perimentation,              Congress           dence, self develop-
writing,                self-motivation                                ment, autonomy,
library                 on the job; auto-                              service, timeliness,
                        nomy, variation;                               styles
                        interdisciplinary;
                        research, self-dis-
                        covery; discipline

Grace                   Developed early             Society’s          Manuscript review
Copy editor,            (age eight); many           journal            policy and procedures,
public rela-            genres; student             publications       culture’s three
tions writer            writing vs.                 office             subcultures, history
                        literary; BA in
                        English; analyzing
                        others’ vs.
                        original work;
                        volunteering;
                        correspondence;
                        promotional
                        copy; editing

Gwen                    Writing requires            Psychiatric        Documentation of and
Medical                 much research;              research           by workers, intrigue,
writer                  writing since               hospital           surveillance, profes-
                        childhood;                                     sional development
                        schooling impor-
                        tant; literature an
                        important influ-
                        ence; family in-
                        fluences; many
                        skills; variety and
                        learning on the
                        job; thorough-
                        ness; patience and
                        understanding
                        required; seeks a
                        contribution to
                        society

Hart                    Hearing an “in-             University         Representing change
Corporate               ternal editor” and          public             and tradition, office
editor, writer          “voice of doom”             relations          status in university
                        while writing;              office             hierarchy, conflicts,
                        comparison with                                writers’ roles
                        Hamlet, The Firm,
                        The Road Less
                        Traveled; humor is
                        a refuge; deadlines
                        as motivation;
                        natural affinity for
                        language; writing
                        self withered while
                        corporate tool;
                        writing is hard
                        work
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             197

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Heather                 Switched from               Association        Writing and editing
Magazine                MA in literature            publications       magazine; isolation of
writing                 to professional             department         staff, physically and
                        writing and                                    culturally
                        editing; practical,
                        realistic, goal
                        oriented, with
                        artistic, creative
                        streak; has dif-
                        ficulty with long
                        papers, lead
                        sentences for
                        news stories;
                        “just starting out
                        as a writer, with
                        room for im-
                        provement”

Helen                   Schooling; job led          Law                Magazine publications
Editing,                her to pursue               enforcement        office, editors’ dif-
organization            professional                training           fering approaches,
magazine                writing and                 facility           implied authorship
                        editing degree;                                of magazine
                        variety; purpose;
                        artistic endeavors

Holly                   Editing while               Newsletter         Decisions and author-
Newsletter              writing, overview           publisher          ity in process, turnover,
writing and             and notes; per-                                management lacunae
editing                 fectionist and
                        organizer, needs
                        clear idea and
                        right conditions;
                        deadline helps;
                        writing and dis-
                        covery; originality
                        and creativity not
                        strong suits;
                        perhaps a better
                        editor than writer

Itsy                    Childhood                   Small              Office dynamics,
Editorial               writing; “struc-            business           newsletters, family
assistant,              tured and uni-              management         metaphor, miscommu-
federal                 maginative                  office             nication
government              writing” in fede-
                        ral government;
                        wants work in
                        publications

Jackie                  Artistic, social,           Association        Publishing bimonthly
News,                   enterprising,               publications       newsletter, staff/“volun-
magazine,               conventional                department         teer” dynamics, “news”
public                  (Holland model);                               role in a public relations
relations               work has fostered                              setting, writing style
writing                 talent in creative                             defined by roles
198      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jackie                  nonfiction, inter-
(continued)             viewing, headline
                        writing, problem
                        solving; future
                        goal: technical
                        writing, pub-
                        lishing, teaching,
                        advertisement
                        copywriting

Jan                     Not a writer, yet;          Professional       Issues management
Editor                  writing as genetic;         association        teams resulted in no
                        literary vs.                headquarters       change in writing
                        professional                                   process, memo use in
                        writing (herself)                              organization,
                                                                       management vs.
                                                                       employees

Jane                    College experi-             City               Red tape, document
Research/               ence in visual              government         cycling; strategically
editing                 arts; “Can I call           agency             missed deadlines
                        myself a writer if
                        I don’t excel at
                        multiple types?”;
                        clinical research
                        associate; ghost-
                        writing; editing
                        children’s book

Janice                  Early develop-              Newsletter/        Business letter in small
Creative                ment; writing as            book               family company, family
freelance               therapy; penchant           fulfillment        conflicts, no second
                        for humor                   company            generation business
                        writing; enjoys                                writers
                        workshops and
                        group processes;
                        enjoys close
                        observation and
                        analysis

Jeff                    Meeting deadlines           Environmen-        Culture clash, technical
Technical               is crucial; good at         tal engineer-      staff vs. editors; status;
editor,                 organizing large            ing con-           expertise and inter-
environmen-             documents;                  sultancy           actions; noun strings
tal engineer-           prefers writing
ing company             humorous essays
                        about people
                        (“male Erma
                        Bombeck”)

Jen                     Two “types” of              Government         Purpose of editorial
Editor,                 writing, personal           employment         pages, office style and
publications            and professional;           newsletter         writing style, all
specialist              personal: journals          publisher          women, feminine
                        (enjoyment,                                    attributes, authority,
                        therapy, relaxed,                              validation
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             199

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jen                     most clear); pro-
(continued)             fessional: job
                        writing and
                        editing (analyti-
                        cal, exacting,
                        “technical-
                        mindedness,”
                        “structured”);
                        writing means
                        expressing self

Jihad                   Identifies purpose          Fast food          Writing forms and
Teaching,               and sticks to it;           headquarters       instructions, implied
business                edits a minimum;            and                readers and voice
memos                   does not revise             franchise
                        ideas; favors
                        uncomplicated
                        language over
                        fancy; as non-
                        native speaker
                        sometimes uses
                        Arabic writing
                        approaches;
                        recent shift to
                        word processing

Jillian                 Satisfaction;               Internet list      Shift in e-“culture”
Academic                solutions to                                   over time, users’ self-
writing                 problems in                                    representation, register
                        others’ writing;
                        exploration;
                        reformulation;
                        academic writing
                        is unfulfilling

Joanne                  BS in technical             Technical          Documenting of tech
Technical/              writing/editing;            contractor         contracting work,
publications            marketing writer                               changes in technology
writing                 in computer                                    and documentation
                        industry;
                        integrating art
                        and text; simple
                        style; analytical,
                        scheduling skills;
                        company news-
                        letter; “social,
                        artistic, enterpris-
                        ing”; social inter-
                        est; collaborative
                        skills; provides
                        financial security

Joe                     Technical writing           Software           Corporate style
Documen-                is a challenge;             development        manual, representa-
tation                  diplomacy and               company            tion, users, audience
specialist              negotiating;
200    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Joe                     rewarding;
(continued)             creator, problem
                        solver (writer
                        working on
                        programmer’s
                        product)

Julie                   Lots of reading             Community          Work writing influence
Teaching,               and thinking                college            on school; perceived
community               about conven-               classroom          applications, similari-
college                 tions (academic                                ties, value
                        and business);
                        composed a com-
                        puter manual;
                        experience in
                        industry and
                        many written
                        genres of
                        workplace

Kali                    Easily adapts               Military           Job insecurity and
Information             styles; uses                contracting        writing quality, self-
and analysis            investigative and           company            imposed standards,
writing                 conventional                                   planning departures
                        skills for work
                        writing (mostly
                        factual tables and
                        charts); uses
                        speech-pattern
                        sentences for
                        personal and
                        informal writing;
                        artistic, social,
                        enterprising

Karla                   Artistic skills;            Association        Newsletter production,
Journalism,             schooling;                  publications       editorial board’s
pubs                    newsmagazine                division           intervention, corporate
                        writing; free-                                 politics
                        lancing; fulfill-
                        ment; narratives
                        of changing jobs,
                        validation; goal is
                        to write fiction

Kate                    “Solid” writer—             University         Tutor styles, writing
Teaching,               others’ estima-             writing            center services, English
academic                tion; precision,            center             department culture/
writing                 readability,                                   writing center culture
                        thoroughness, yet
                        lacking spark; not
                        a “creative”
                        writer (humilia-
                        tion); more
                        comfortable in
                        third person than
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             201

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Kate                    first, would like
(continued)             to meld first
                        person and third
                        in this course

Kelly                   Teaching compo-             University         Changes in publications
Copy editor/            sition; freelancing;        publications       process to “teams”;
writer,                 journalism; pub-            department         time, pressure; different
publications            lications; variety                             participants’ viewpoints
                        and volume of
                        work; creative
                        writing interest;
                        “painful”

Kirsten                 Influence of                Association        Publishing monthly
Magazines,              college instruc-            magazine           magazine, work ethic,
public                  tion by magazine            publications       standards, collabora-
relations               writer; interviews          division           tive and solo work
writing                 and research lead
                        the writing;
                        nonprofit writing
                        to raise public
                        awareness; future
                        goal: marketing
                        or public
                        relations writing

Kolar                   No assessment               U.S. senator’s Hill culture, press
Editorial               provided                    office         office writing, fabri-
assistant,                                                         cation, socialization
public
relations

Kyle                    Practice and                Association        Magazine publication,
Writing and             perfection (edit-           communica-         turnover, publication
editing,                ing association             tions de-          processes and
organization            magazine); edit-            partment           creativity
magazine                ing others; devel-
                        oping style (easy
                        to read, clear,
                        concise); true love
                        is humor (D.
                        Barry); e-mails a
                        favorite place to
                        write—not
                        literary or poetic,
                        but fun and
                        understandable

Lara                    Working with                Elementary         Composing school
Teaching,               kindergartners;             school             plan collaboratively;
kindergarten            artistic theme                                 difficulties, poor
                        strong in Holland                              management of
                        model; difficulty                              collaborative writing
                        in expression at
                        times; write funny
202    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lara                    letters, emotional
(continued)             poetry, deter-
                        mined letters to
                        Congress

Leathe                  Working                     Research           Culture of a “flat
Technical/              independently,              and                organization”; chain of
report                  analyzes, con-              technical          command; project
writing                 ceptualizes, and            development        cycling, iterations
                        organizes infor-            company
                        mation; creates
                        tables; writes data
                        up without the-
                        orizing; dislikes
                        proposals, prizes
                        “time flexibility”;
                        likes data analysis

Lee                     Writing to learn,           Writing            Tutoring vs. computer
Teacher,                writing and                 center             lab, evaluating soft-
writing                 reading; writing                               ware, organizational
center                  to explain, pro-                               location and conflict
director                vide information
                        at work; journal
                        for exploring,
                        examining
                        feelings; notes,
                        letters, and lists in
                        “everyday life”;
                        lacks discipline;
                        revises a lot; play-
                        ing with words

Leigh                   Professional                U.S. cabinet  writing processes,
Editor,                 writing means               speechwriters writer’s references,
government              editing other                             “idea factory”,
                        people’s writing,                         metaphors, civil
                        style to govern-                          servant vs. political
                        ment standards;
                        memos are
                        “structured
                        writing” (a for-
                        matting technique)
                        (persuasive memo
                        to boss got money
                        for graduate
                        school); academic
                        writing includes
                        hypertext fiction,
                        a struggle and is
                        revealing about
                        self as writer
                        (vulnerability,
                        flow, catharsis);
                        writing always
                        part of life
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             203

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lena                    Enjoys language,            Nonprofit          Management style,
Teaching,               “putting it to-             educational        editors’ decisions on
high school             gether”; “scaled-           publications       manuscripts, career
                        back ambitions”             company            advancement for
                        (great novels,                                 writers means moving
                        MFA vs. MA in                                  into management
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing); likes to
                        observe, describe,
                        draw conclusions

Lisa                    Understanding               Bank               Style: marketing and
Analyst,                through writing;                               prestige; commercial
English as a            writing as means;                              loan vs. operations;
second                  writing and inves-                             family symbolism;
language                tigative skills; non-                          gender, conflict, morale
teacher                 native speakers in
                        American work
                        culture

Liz                     BA in French;               World Bank         Writing style, editors’
Staff                   MA underway to              editors            work, organizational
assistant               expand profes-                                 division’s status, sup-
                        sional scope,                                  port staff/professional
                        improve writing                                staff
                        skills; difficulty
                        with long docu-
                        ments; strengths:
                        creativity and
                        variety of style,
                        persuasive
                        writing; uses
                        e-mail extensively

Lois                    Career change;              Telecommu-         Face-to-face and
Marketing,              striving to                 nications          virtual cultures, top-
organization            improve skill