Chapter 2: Definition of Rhetoric; Pisteis, or the Means of
Persuasion in Public Address; Paradigms, Enthymemes,
and Their Sources; Common Topics; Eidé and Idia

 1. Let rhetoric be [defined as] an ability, in each [particular] case, to see the available
means of persuasion.*+ This is the function of no other art;35 for each of the others3é
is instructive and persuasive about its own subject: for example, medicine about
health and disease and geometry about the properties of magnitudes and arithmetic
about numbers and similarly in the case of the other arts and sciences. But rhetoric
seems to be able to observe the persuasive about “the given,” so to speak. That, too,


first includes the second; but rhétér is “unmarked” and may be interpreted either as any effective speaker or as a
speaker who uses tricky arguments.
32 In classical Greek, rhétdr means any public speaker, though often referring to a person who plays a leadership
role in public debate or is active in the law courts. In the Roman period, rhétér frequently means “rhetorician,
“teacher of rhetoric.” Latin orator (orig. “envoy”) and thus English “orator,” are translations of rhétdr but take
on an implication of eloquence not necessarily present in the Greek word.
33 For some speculations on Aristotle’s objectives, see Lord 1981. Aristotle’s own objective is clearly an under-
standing of the nature, materials, and uses of rhetoric; but he has pointed out that the art is useful, and as the
treatise unrolls it will often take on the tone of a prescriptive handbook on how to compose a persuasive
speech.
34 Aristotle uses the phrase esto dé, “Let X be. . .” commonly of a working hypothesis rather than a final defini-
tion and occasionally to resume a definition made earlier. The definition here is anticipated in 1.1.14 on the
ergon of rhetoric. He identifies the genus to which rhetoric belongs as dynamis: “ability, capacity, faculty.” In
his philosophical writing dynamis is the regular word for “potentially” in matter or form that is “actualized” by
an efficient cause. The actuality produced by the potentiality of rhetoric is not the written or oral text of a
speech, or even persuasion but the art of “seeing” how persuasion may be effected. In Nicomachean Ethics 6.4
(see Appendix I.B) he defines all art as a reasoned capacity to make something and says that it is concerned
with the coming-into-being of something that is capable of either being or not being. Art is thus for him not
the product of artistic skill, but the skill itself. Later rhetoricians often amplify Aristotle's definition by adding
through speech; the root of the word rhetoric, rhé—, refers specifically to speech. Though he uses poetics to reter to
arts other than poetry (dance, painting, sculpture), he never uses rhetoric to refer to any art except that of
speech. As is clear from chap. 3, Aristotle primarily thinks of rhetoric as manifested in the civic context of
public address; but he often draws examples of rhetoric from poetry or historical writing, and in the Poetics
(19.1456a-b) the “thought” of a speaker in tragedy is said to be a matter of rhetoric. In each case (peri hekaston)
refers to the fact that rhetoric deals with specific circumstances (particular individuals and their actions). To
see translates theorésai, “to be an observer of and to grasp the meaning or utility of.” English theory comes from
the related noun theoria. The available means of persuasion renders to enkekhomenon pithanon, “what is inherently
and potentially persuasive” in the facts, circumstances, character of the speaker, attitude of the audience, etc.
Endekhomenon often means “possible.”
35 Dialectic comes closest but deals with general questions, not specific cases; and for dialectic the final term,
means of persuasion (pithanon), would presumably become means of reasoning (syllogismos); see Topics 1.1 in
Appendix I.C.
36 Except, of course, dialectic.
28   Chapter   1 =» What Is Rhetoric?



           is why we say it does not include technical knowledge of any particular, defined
           genus [of subjects].
                2. Of the pisteis, some are atechnic [“nonartistic”], some entechnic [“embodied in
           art, artistic”].37 [ call atechnic those that are not provided by “us” [i.e., the potential
           speaker] but are preexisting: for example, witnesses, testimony of slaves taken under
           torture,?8 contracts, and such like; and artistic whatever can be prepared by method
           and by “us”; thus, one must use the former and invent?? the latter. [1356a] 3. Of the
           pisteis provided through speech there are three species: for some are in the character
           [éthos] of the speaker, and some in disposing the listener in some way, and some in the
           argument [logos] itself, by showing or seeming to show something.*°
                4. [There is persuasion] through character whenever the speech is spoken*! in
           such a way as to make the speaker worthy of credence; for we believe fair-minded
           people to a greater extent and more quickly [than we do others] on all subjects in
           general and completely so in cases where there is not exact knowledge but room for
           doubt.#2 And this should result from speech, not from a previous opinion that the
           speaker is a certain kind of person; for it is not the case, as some of the technical
           writers propose in their treatment of the art, that fair-mindedness [epieikeia] on the
           part of the speaker makes no contribution to persuasiveness;*4 rather, character is al-
           most, so to speak, the controlling factor in persuasion.
                5. [There is persuasion] through the hearers when they are led to feel emotion
           [pathos] by the speech; for we do not give the same judgment when grieved and re-
           joicing or when being friendly and hostile. To this and only this we said contempo-


           37 Later writers sometimes call these extrinsic and intrinsic, respectively. Aristotle discusses atechnic proof in
           1.15. In 3.16.1 he also refers to the “facts” in a epideictic speech as atechnic.
           38 In Greek law, the evidence of slaves was only admissible in court if taken under torture. There was much de-
           bate about its reliability; see 1.15.26.
           39 Heurein, “to find out”; heuresis becomes the regular word for rhetorical invention.
           40 Ethos in Aristotle means “character,” esp. “moral character,” and except in 2.21.16 is regarded as an attribute
           of a person, not of a speech. Aristotle does not use the term in the technical sense of “rhetorical ethos,” the
           technique or effect of the presentation of character in a discourse. “Disposing the listener in some way” is de-
           fined in sec. 5 below as leading the hearers to feel emotion (pathos). Again, pathos is an attribute of persons, not
           of a speech. The shorthand ethos—pathos-—logos to describe the modes of persuasion is a convenience but does
           not represent Aristotle’s own usage.
           41 Aristotle is not thinking of style and delivery but of the thought and contents.
           42 Here and in 1.9.1 and 2.1.5—7 the role of character in a speech is regarded as making the speaker seem trust-
           worthy. The extended discussion of types of character in 2.12—17 relates to the somewhat different matter of
           the adaptation of the character of a speaker to the character of an audience. Aristotle’s later treatment of char-
           acter in rhetoric is in fact somewhat wider than in this initial definition.
           43 Aristotle thus does not include in rhetorical ethos the authority that a speaker may possess due to his posi-
           tion in government or society, previous actions, reputation for wisdom, or anything except what is actually
           contained in the speech and the character it reveals. Presumably, he would regard all other factors, sometimes
           highly important in the success of rhetoric, as imartistic; but he never says so. One practical reason for stressing
           character as revealed within the speech was that Greek law required defendants to speak on their own behalf,
           and they were often lacking in external authority. They could commission a speech from a professional speech-
           writer (lagographer) and then memorize it for delivery in court. Lysias, in particular, had great success in con-
           veying a favorable impression or moral character (&thopoiia) in the many speeches he wrote for defendants.
           44 Some handbook writers perhaps rejected an appearance of fair-mindedness as too mild and favored an un-
           compromising attitude. Aristotle’s point is that an appearance of fair-mindedness gives the speaker an initial
           advantage.
                                                                     Aristotle    = Excerpts from Book I, Rhetoric     29


rary technical writers try to give their attention. The details on this subject will be
made clear when we speak about the emotions.‘
     6. Persuasion occurs through the arguments [logoi] when we show the truth or the
apparent truth from whatever is persuasive in each case.
     7. Since pisteis come about through these [three means], it is clear that to grasp
an understanding of them is the function of one who can form syllogisms and be ob-
servant about characters and virtues and, third, about emotions (what each of the
emotions is and what are its qualities and from what it comes to be and how). The re-
sult is that rhetoric is a certain kind of offshoot [paraphues] or dialectic and of ethical
studies (which it is just to call politics).4 (Thus, too, rhetoric dresses itself up#? in the
form of politics, as do those who pretend to a knowledge of it,48 sometimes through
lack of education, sometimes through boastfulness and other human causes.)
Rhetoric is partly [morion ti] dialectic, and resembles it, as we said at the outset; for
neither of them is identifiable with knowledge of any specific subject, but they are
distinct abilities of supplying words. Concerning their potentiality and how they re-
late to each other, almost enough has been said.
     8. In the case of persuasion through proving or seeming to prove something, just
as in dialectic [1356b] there is on the one hand induction [epagégé] and on the other
the syllogism and the apparent syllogism, so the situation is similar in rhetoric; for the
paradeigma [“example”] is an induction, the enthymema a syllogism. I call a rhetorical
syllogism an enthymeme, a rhetorical induction a paradigm.*? And all [speakers] pro-
duce logical persuasion by means of paradigms or enthymemes and by nothing other
than these. As a result, since it is always necessary to show something either by syllo-
gizing or by inducing (and this is clear to us from the Analytics),°° it is necessary that
each of these be the same as each of the others.>! 9. What the difference is between a

45 In 2.2-11. Aristotle’s inclusion of emotion as a mode of persuasion, despite his objections to the handbooks,
is a recognition that among human beings judgment is not entirely a rational act. There are morally valid emo-
tions in every situation, and it is part of the orator’s duty to clarify these in the minds of the audience. On this
question in general, see Johnstone 1980; 1-24.
46 In calling rhetoric an antistrophos ofdialectic in 1.1.1, and an offshoot of dialectic and ethical studies here,
and “partly dialectic” and like it in the next sentence, Aristotle avoids use of the formal categories of genus and
species. He cannot very well call rhetoric a species ofdialectic, since it contains elements—the persuasive ef-
fect of character and emotion in particular—that are not proper to dialectic; but at the same time he stresses
the logical side of rhetoric and thus its relationship to dialectic. He does not entertain the possibility that di-
alectic should be regarded as a species of rhetoric, perhaps because dialectic deals with universals, rhetoric with
specifics; dialectic is logically prior. Also, to make rhetoric the more general term would lead to the celebration
of it as the most characteristic and worthwhile human activity, as Isocrates regarded it. For Aristotle, that
honor belongs to philosophy—hence his attempt to find metaphors to describe rhetoric as a mixture of logical,
political, and ethical elements. In Nicomachean Ethics 1.2.4-6 he says that politics is an “architectonic” subject,
of which generalship, economics, and rhetoric are parts.
4? Hypoduetai, an echo of Plato, Gorgias 464c.
48 Gorgias, Polus, Isacrates, and their followers.
49 Aristotle will discuss the paradigm at greater length in 2.20 and the enthymeme in 2.22. The first three sen-
tences of this paragraph, found in all manuscripts, are double-bracketed by Rudolf Kassel in his Berlin 1976
edition of the Greek text, which is Kassel’s way of indicating passages that he regarded as later additions by
Aristotle to the otherwise completed treatise. These are interesting suggestions, but essentially subjective in
each case.
50 Prior Analytics 2.23; Posterior Analytics 1.1.
51 Not identical, in which case there would be no need for two sets of terms, but essentially the same in their
30   Chapter 1 # What Is Rhetoric?



           paradigm and an enthymeme is clear from the Topics (for ari account was given there
           earlier of syllogism and induction):52 to show on the basis of many similar instances
           that something is so is in dialectic induction, in rhetoric paradigm; but to show that if
           some premises are true, something else [the conclusion] beyond them results from
           these because they are true, either universally or for the most part, in dialectic is
           called syllogism and in rhetoric enthymeme. 10. And it is also apparent that either
           species of rhetoric®? has merit (what has also been said in the Methodics* is true in
           these    cases    too);     for some       rhetorical      utterances       are    paradigmatic,        some       en-
           thymematic; and similarly, some orators are paradigmatic, some enthymematic.
           Speeches using paradigms are not less persuasive, but those with enthymemes excite
           more favorable audience reaction. 11. The cause—and how each should be used—we
           shall explain later;55 now we shall explain these things themselves more clearly.
                Since the persuasive is persuasive to someone (and is either immediately plausi-
           ble and believable in itself or seems to be shown by statements that are so) and since
           no art examines the particular—for example, the art of medicine does not specify
           what is healthful for Socrates or for Callias but for persons of a certain sort (this is
           artistic, while particulars are limitless and not knowable)—neither does rhetoric the-
           orize about each opinion—what may seem so to Socrates or Hippias—but about what
           seems true to people of a certain sort, as is also true with dialectic.5® For the latter
           does not form syllogisms from things at random (some things seem true even to mad-
           men) but from that [which seems true] to people in need of argument, and rhetoric
           [forms enthymemes] from things [that seem true] to people already accustomed to de-
           liberate among themselves.*? [1357a] 12. Its function [ergon] is concerned with the
           sort of things we debate and for which we do not have [other] arts and among such
           listeners as are not able to see many things all together or to reason from a distant
           starting point. And we debate about things that seem to be capable for admitting two
           possibilities; for no one debates things incapable of being different either in past or
           future or present, at least not if they suppose that to be the case; for there is nothing
           more [to say]. 13. It is possible to form syllogisms and draw inductive conclusions ei-
           ther from previous syllogisms or from statements that are not reasoned out but require
           a syllogism [if they are to be accepted] because they are not commonly believed
           [endoxa]; but the former of these |i.e., a chain of syllogism] is necessarily not easy to
           follow because of the length [of the argument] (the judge is assumed to be a simple


           underlying structure. In formal logic an induction consists of a series of particular observations from which a
           general conclusion is drawn; in rhetoric it takes the form of a particular statement supported by one or more
           parallels, with the universal conclusion left unstated. Similarly, an enthymeme rarely takes the full syllogistic
           form of major premise, minor premise, and conclusion; more often a conclusion is offered and supported by a
           reason, as in the first sentence of the Rhetoric. On the logic of this passage see Schrdder 1985. Schréder does
           not agree with Kassel’s view that it is a later addition.
           52 There is some discussion of syllogism in Topics 1.1, and 1.12 offers a definition of induction with an example:
           “Tf the skilled pilot is best, and [similarly] the charioteer, then in general the skilled is the best in each thing.”
           53 The species using example or that using enthymeme.
           °4 A lost logical work by Aristotle of which the extant On Interpretation may have been a part; see Rist 1989,
           84.
           55 In 2.20-24.
           °6 Dialectic builds its proof on the opinions of all, the majority, or the wise; cf. Topics 1.1 in Appendix I.C.
           5? Translating the text as conjectured by Kassel.
                                                                     Aristotle     = Excerpts from Book I, Rhetoric   31


person),*> and the latter is not persuasive because the premises are not agreed to or
commonly believed. Thus, it is necessary for an enthymeme and a paradigm to be
concerned with things that are for the most part capable of being other than they
are—the paradigm inductively, the enthymeme syllogistically—and drawn from few
premises and often less than those of the primary syllogism; for if one of these is
known, it does not have to be stated, since the hearer supplies it: for example, [to
show] that Dorieus has won a contest with a crown it is enough to have said that he
has won the Olympic games, and there is no need to add that the Olympic games
have a crown as the prize; for everybody knows that.®
     14. Since few of the premises from which rhetorical syllogisms are formed are
necessarily true (most of the matters with which judgment and examination are con-
cerned can be other than they are; for people deliberate and examine what they are
doing, and [human] actions are all of this kind, and none of them [are], so to speak,
necessary) and since things that happen for the most part and are possible can only
be reasoned on the basis of other such things, and necessary actions [only] from ne-
cessities (and this is clear to us also from the Analytics),®! it is evident that [the
premises] from which enthymemes are spoken are scmetimes necessarily true but
mostly true [only] for the most part. Moreover, enthymemes are derived from proba-
bilities [eikota] and signs [sémeia], so it is necessary that each of these be the same as
each [of the truth values mentioned];® 15. for a probability [eikos] is what happens for
the most part, not in a simple sense, as some define it, but whatever, among things
that can be other than they are, is so related to that in regard to which it is probable
as a universal is related to a particular. [1357b] 16. In the case of signs [sémeia],
some are related as the particular to the universal, some as the universal to the partic-
ular. Of these, a necessary sign is a tekmerion, and that which is not necessary has no
distinguishing name. 17. Now | call necessary for those from which a [logically valid]
syllogism can be formed; thus, | call this kind of sign a tékmerion; for when people
think it is not possible to refute a statement, they think they are offering a tekmérion,
as though the matter were shown and concluded [peparasmenon]. (Tekmar and peras


58 By judge (krités) Aristotle means a member of the assembly or of a jury. In Athenian legal procedures there
were no professional judges in the modern sense. The democratic juries of the Athenian courts ranged in size
from 201 to 5,001, drawn by lot from the male citizen body.
59 The fully expressed syllogism that is logically inherent in the enthymeme.
60 Later writers (see Appendix I.F) often regard an enthymeme as an abbreviated syllogism in which one
premise, usually the major, is not expressed but is assumed, e.g., “Socrates is mortal, for he is a man,” assuming
“all men are mortal.” Aristotle notes that this is often the case, but it is not a necessary feature of the en-
thymeme. The real determinant of an enthymeme in contrast to a syllogism is what a popular audience will un-
derstand. Aristotle regards rhetoric, and thus the enthymeme, as addressed to an audience that cannot be as-
sumed to follow intricate logical argument or will be impatient with premises that seem unnecessary steps in
the argument. The underlying logical structure should, however be present.
61 Prior Analytics 1.8, 1.12-14, 1.27; Posterior Analytics 1.6, 1.30, 2.12.
62 [.e., probabilities correspond to things true for the most part, signs to things necessarily true. But Aristotle
will modify this in what follows: some signs are necessary, others only probable. Both probabilities and signs are
stateraents about human actions, though they may be based on physical manifestations, as the following exam-
ples show.
63 Grimaldi (1980-88, 1:62) instances “Children love their parents”: it is a “probability” because a general ob-
servation—universal in form, probably, but not necessarily true in particular instances. “Some” may refer to
handbook writers who discussed argument from probability.
32   Chapter 1   #® What Is Rhetoric?



           (limit, conclusion”] have the same meaning in the ancient form of [our] language.)
           18. An example of signs [sémeia] related as the particular to the universal is if some-
           one were to state that since Socrates was wise and just, it is a sign that the wise are
           just. This is indeed a sign, but refutable, even if true in this case; for it is not syllogis-
           tically valid. But if someone were to state that there is a sign that someone is sick, for
           he has a fever, or that a woman has given birth, for she has milk, that is a necessary
           sign. Among signs, this is only true of a tekmérion; for only it, if true, is irrefutable. It
           is an example of the relation of the universal to the particular if someone said that it
           is a sign of fever that someone breathes rapidly. This, too, is refutable, even if true [in
           some case]; for it is possible to breathe rapidly and not be feverish. Thus, what proba-
           bility is and what sign and tekmérion are and how they differ has now been explained.
           In the Analytics®4 they are defined more clearly, and the cause explained why some
           are not syllogistic and others are.
                 19. It has been explained that a paradigm is an induction and with what kinds of
           things it is concerned. It is reasoning neither from part to whole nor from whole to
           part but from part to part, like to like, when two things fall under the same genus but
           one is better known than the other.®> For example, [when someone claims] that
           Dionysius is plotting tyranny because he is seeking a bodyguard; for Peisistratus also,
           when plotting earlier, sought a guard and after receiving it made himself tyrant, and
           Theagenes [did the same] in Megara, and others, whom the audience knows of, all be-
           come examples of Dionysius, of whom they do not yet know whether he makes his
           demand for this reason. All these actions fall under the same [genus]: that one plot-
           ting tyranny seeks a guard.©
                [1358a] The sources of pisteis that seem demonstrative [apodeiktikai] have now
           been explained. 20. But in the case of enthymemes, a very big difference—and one
           overlooked by almost everybody—is one that is also found in the case of syllogisms in
           dialectical method; for some [enthymemes] are formed in accord with the method of
           rhetoric, just as also some syllogisms are formed in accord with the method of dialec-
           tic, while others accord with [the content of] other arts and capabilities, either those
           in existence or those not yet understood.*’ Hence, [the differences] escape notice of
           the listeners; and the more [speakers] fasten upon [the subject matter] in its proper
           sense, [the more] they depart from rhetoric or dialectic.68 This statement will be
           clearer if explained in more detail.

           64 Prior Analystics 2.27.
           65 There is an “unmeditated inference,” or unspoken recognition of the universal proposition. See Hauser 1985,
           171-79.
           66 It could be argued that seeking a bodyguard is a “sign” of intent to establish a tyranny, and certainly para-
           digms and signs have some similarity; but Aristotle seems to think of a paradigm as useful in indicating motiva-
           tion or the probable course of events that the audience might not otherwise anticipate, whereas a sign is usu-
           ally an existing fact or condition that anyone might recognize. More important to him, however, is the logical
           difference that the paradigm moves from the particular premises to a particular conclusion, with the universal
           link not necessarily expressed (just as the universal major premise of an enthymeme need not be expressed),
           whereas the sign moves either from universal to particular or particular to universal.
           67 t is characteristic of Aristotle to feel that there were other subjects not yet systematically studied.
           68 This passage is regarded as textually corrupt by the editors. Kassel indicates that something has been lost af-
           ter listeners; Ross rejects the more. The basic thought is that people do not realize that rhetoric and dialectic,
           though they have a method, lack content or facts and must borrow these from other disciplines, such as politics
           or ethics. Enthymemes are rhetorical strategies but also usually substantive arguments; and the more the argu-
                                                                      Aristotle     = Excerpts from Book I, Rhetoric     33

The “Topics” of Sylogisms and Enthymemes

Topos literally means “place,” metaphorically that location or space in an art where a
speaker can look for “available means of persuasion.” Rhetoric itself can be said to
operate in civic space. Although the word accords with Aristotle’s fondness for visual
imagery, he did not originate its use in the sense of “topic”; Isocrates, early in the
fourth century, had so used it, and probably others did before him. In Isocrates’
Encomium of Helen (section 4) topos refers to forms of eristical argument, such as fact
or possibility—what Aristotle will call koina. In the same speech (section 38) topos
refers to the use of an ancient witness, Theseus’ opinion of Helen—what Aristotle re-
gards as “nonartistic” pistis. The word may also already have been used in mnemonic
theory of the physical setting against which an object or idea could be remembered.
Neither in Topics nor in Rhetoric does Aristotle give a definition of topos, another sign
that he assumed the word would be easily understood; he does, however, give his own
special twist to its meaning, usually distinguishing it from koina and idia and using it
primarily of strategies of argument as discussed in 2.23. See Sprute 1982, 172-82.
     21. I am saying that dialectical and rhetorical syllogisms are those in which we
state topoi, and these are applicable in common [koinéi] to questions of justice and
physics and politics and many different species [of knowledge]; for example, the topos
of the more and the less;® for to form syllogisms or speak enthymemes from this
about justice will be just as possible as about physics or anything else, although these
subjects differ in species.’ But there are “specifics””! that come from the premises of
each species and genus [of knowledge]; for example, in physics there are premises
from which there is neither an enthymeme nor a syllogism applicable to ethics; and
in ethics [there are] others not useful in physics. It is the same in all cases. The former
[the common topoi} will not make one understand any genus; for they are not con-
cerned with any underlying subject. As to the latter [the specifics], to the degree that
someone makes better choice of the premises, he will have created knowledge differ-
ent from dialectic and rhetoric without its being recognized; for if he succeeds in hit-
ting on first principles [arkhai], the knowledge will no longer be dialectic or rhetoric
but the science of which [the speaker] grasps the first principles.7? 22. Most en-

ment comes from the premises of politics, ethics, or other subjects, the more the enthymeme becomes an argu-
ment of that discipline and the less it is purely rhetorical. In practice, the limits are never reached; any argu-
ment has some strategy (what Aristotle will call “topics” in 2.23) and some content (what he will call idia and
discuss in 1.4-14 and 2.1-17). Some possible implications of this passage are discussed by Garver 1988, but he
twists the meaning of some of Aristotle’s words (metabaind, tynkhané, etc.) to create problems that perhaps do
not exist.
6) To be discussed in 2.23.4 (the chapter on topics).
70 The topos does not tell one anything about these subjects but can be applied to each; for example, “If it is just
to punish offenses, it is more just to punish great offenses,” “If a small force will move a body, a larger force will
move it as well” and “If public revenues will support a large army, they will support a smaller army.”
71 Idia (n. pl. of the adj. from eidos), “specificities, specific or particular things.” The word is chosen to denote
things characteristic of the species. Aristotle here does not call these specifics topics, but he does so refer to
them in 1.15.19; and in sec. 22, as well as in 1.61, he speaks of them as stoikheia, which he says later (2.22.13,
2.26.1) are the “same” as topics. Thus, many rhetoricians have found it convenient to speak of “special, spe-
cific-particular, material” topics belonging to the separate disciplines, in contrast to “common” or “formal” top-
ics, which are rhetorical or dialectical strategies of argument.
72 For the concept of “first principles” see note on 1.7.12. Part or all of a discourse may be thought of as falling
in a spectrum, varying from the most general and popular to the most technical. A speech in a law court, for
example, will become less “rhetorical” and more “jurisprudential” as it undertakes detailed discussion of the
34   Chapter 1 #    What Is Rhetoric?



          thymemes are derived from these species that are’particular and specific, fewer from
          the common [topics]. Just as in the case of topoi, so also in the case of enthymemes,
          a distinction should be made between the species and the topoi from which they are
          to be taken. By “species” ] mean the premises specific to each genus [of knowledge],
          and by topoi those common to all. But let us take up first the genera [gene] of rhetoric
          so that having defined how many there are, we may separately take up their ele-
          ments’4 and premises.”

          Chapter 3: The Three Species of Rhetoric:
          Deliberative, Judicial, and Epideictic
           1. The species [eidé] of rhetoric are three in number; for such is the number [of classes]
           to which the hearers of speeches belong. A speech [situation] consists of three things:
           a speaker and a subject on which he speaks and someone addressed,” [1358b] and the
           objective [telos] of the speech relates to the last (J mean the hearer). 2. Now it is nec-
           essary for the hearer to be either a spectator [theoros] or a judge [krités], and [in the lat-
          ter case] a judge of either past or future happenings. A member of a democratic assem-
          bly is an example of one judging about future happenings, a juryman an example of
          one judging the past. A spectator is concerned with the ability [of the speaker].77 3.
          Thus, there would necessarily be three genera of rhetorics;’8 symbouleutikon [“delibera-
           tive”, dikanikon [“judicial”], epideiktikon [“demonstrative”]. Deliberative advice is ei-


           law. In terms of valid proof it is desirable to do this, but too technical a speech will not be comprehensible to
           the judges.
           3 This is because of the need for “content”: rhetoric constantly employs the special knowledge of other arts,
           such as politics or ethics.
           74 Elements (stoikheia) are the same as topics; see 2.22.13, 2.26.1.
           15 Aristotle’s use of genos, eidos, and idia in this passage may make it somewhat difficult to follow; but he is
           probably not seeking to make a logical statement about the relationship of genus and species. In a general way
           he can be said to view knowledge as a genus of which particular forms, (e.g., physics, politics, and ethics) are
           species (eid@). The premises of the eidé are their idia. In the concluding sentence he also calls the kinds of
           rhetoric gené (genera), but in the first sentence of the next chapter will call them eidé (species) and in 3.3 re-
           verts to gené. See n. 78.
           76 Eighteenth-century rhetoricians add the occasion to Aristotle’s three factors in the speech situation, and mod-
           ern authorities have suggested other approaches, e.g., “addresser, message, addressee, context, common code,
           and contact” (Roman Jakobson).
           71 This sentence is rejected by Kassel as an insertion into the text by a later reader, perhaps rightly. The audi-
           ence in epideictic is not called upon to take a specific action, in the way that an assemblyman or juryman is
           called upon to vote; but epideictic may be viewed as an oratorical contest, either with other speakers or previ-
           ous speakers (cf., e.g., lsocrates, Panegyricus 1), and in 2.18.1 Aristotle notes that the spectator also is in this
           sense a judge. The definition of epideictic has remained a problem in rhetorical theory, since it becomes the
           category for all forms ofdiscourse that are not specifically deliberative or judicial; later ancient rhetoricians re-
           garded it as including poetry and prose literature, and since Renaissance times it has sometimes included other
           arts like painting, sculpture, and music as well. Aristotle, however, thinks of epideictic only as a species of ora-
           tory as he knew its forms in Greece, including funeral orations like that by Pericles in Thucydides’ History of the
           Peloponnesian War (2.35—46) and the Encomia of Helen by Gorgias and Isocrates. In such speeches, praise cor-
           rects, modifies, or strengthens an audience’s belief about civic virtue or the reputation of an individual.
           78 The appearance here of “rhetorics” in the plural is very unusual in Greek and probably results from the use of
           gené in the plural. Aristotle may use gené here of the kinds of rhetorics earlier called eidé because in the next
           sentence he is going to divide them further into species.
                                                                      Aristotle     = Excerpts from Book I, Rhetoric    35


ther protreptic [“exhortation”] or apotreptic [“dissuasion”]; for both those advising in
private and those speaking in public always do one or the other of these. In the law
court there is either accusation [katégoria] or defense [apologial; for it is necessary for
the disputants to offer one or the other of these. In epideictic, there is either praise
[epainos] or blame [psogos]. 4. Each of these has its own “time”: for the deliberative
speaker, the future (for whether exhorting or dissuading he advises about future
events); for the speaker in court, the past (for he always prosecutes or defends con-
cerning what has been done); in epideictic the present is the most important; for all
speakers praise or blame in regard to existing qualities, but they often also make use of
other things, both reminding [the audience] of the past and projecting the course of
the future.’? 5. The “end”8° of each of these is different, and there are three ends for
three [species]: for the deliberative speaker [the end] is the advantageous
[sympheron]*! and the harmful (for someone urging something advises it as the better
course and one dissuading dissuades on the ground that it is worse), and he includes
other factors as incidental: whether it is just or unjust, or honorable or disgraceful; for
those speaking in the law courts [the end] is the just [dikaion] and the unjust, and they
make other considerations incidental to these; for those praising and blaming [the
end] is the honorable [kalon] and the shameful, and these speakers bring up other
considerations in reference to these qualities. 6. Here is a sign that the end of each
[species of rhetoric] is what has been said: sometimes one would not dispute other fac-
tors; for example, a judicial speaker [might not deny] that he has done something or
done harm, but he would never agree that he has [intentionally] done wrong; for [if
he admitted that,] there would be no need of a trial. Similarly, deliberative speakers
often grant other factors, but they would never admit that they are advising things
that are not advantageous [to the audience] or that they are dissuading [the audience]
from what is beneficial; and often they do not insist that it is not unjust to enslave
neighbors or those who have done no wrong. And similarly, those who praise or
blame do not consider whether someone has done actions that are advantageous or
harmful [to himself] [1359a] but often they include it even as a source of praise that
he did what was honorable without regard to the cost to himself; for example, they
praise Achilles because he went to the aid of his companion Patroclus knowing that
he himself must die, though he could have lived. To him, such a death was more hon-
orable; but life was advantageous.


79 In practice, as in funeral orations, speakers usually praise past actions but with the intent of celebrating time-
less virtues and inculcating them as models for the future.
80 Telos, the final objective of the speaker and his art, which is actualized in the persuasion of an audience.
Later rhetoricians sometimes called these “final headings.” Each telos often becomes a specific topic in a speech;
see, for example, the discussions of expedience and justice in the speeches of Cleon and Diodotus in the
Mytilenian debate in Thucydides 3.37—-48.
81 Sympheron is often translated “expedient”; literally, it means whatever “brings with it” advantage (Lat.
utilitas). Later rhetoricians were troubled by the moral implication and sought to modify what they saw as
Aristotle’s focus on expediency in political discourse; see esp. Quintilian 3.8.1-3. Since Aristotle has said in
1.1.12 that we must not persuade what is bad, he would presumably recommend that a speaker seek to identify
the enlightened, long-term advantage to the audience. “Advantageous” or “beneficial” seems the best transla-
tion. In sec. 6 Aristotle recognizes that in practice deliberative speakers are often indifferent to the question of
the injustice to others of some action.
36   Chapter   1   #   What Is Rhetoric?



           Propositions Common             to All Species of Rhetoric

           No technical term appears in this chapter to denote the four subjects of propositions
           described here, but in 2.18.2 they are called koina, “common things,” “commonalties,”
           in contrast to idia, “specifics.” They are discussed in greater detail in 2.19. Since the
           koinon “greater and smaller” discussed in section 9 seems similar to the topic of “the
           more and the less” mentioned in 1.2.21, these koina have often been called “topics” or
           “common topics.” Grimaldi (1980-88, 1:85-86) objects to this, with some reason,
           though in 3.19.2 Aristotle speaks of “topics” of amplification and seems to be referring
           to 2.19. Generally, however, Aristotle keeps them distinct: the topic of “the more and
           the less,” discussed separately in 2.23.4, is a strategy of argument, always involving
           some contrast, whereas “greater and smaller,” discussed in 1.7, 14 and 2.19.26—27, are
           arguments about the degree of magnitude (that term occurs in 2.18.4) or importance of
           something and are analogous to such questions as whether something is possible or has
           actually been done. Whether something is possible, actually true, or important are
           fundamental issues in any speech; and thus Aristotle mentions them immediately after
           identifying the basic issues of the advantageous, the just, and the honorable.
                7. It is evident from what has been said that it is first of all necessary [for a speaker]
           to have propositions [protaseis] on these matters.8? (Tekméria and probabilities and
           signs are rhetorical propositions. A syllogism is wholly from propositions, and the en-
           thymeme is a syllogism consisting of propositions expressed.        )® 8. And since impossi-
           bilities cannot be done nor have been done, but possibilities [alone can be done or
           have been done], it is necessary for the deliberative, judicial, and epideictic speaker to
           have propositions about the possible and the impossible and [about] whether some-
           thing has happened or not and [about] whether it will or will not come to be. 9.
           Further, since all speakers, praising and blaming and urging and dissuading and prose-
           cuting and defending, not only try to show what has been mentioned but that the
           good or the evil or the honorable or the shameful or the just or the unjust is great or
           small, either speaking of things in themselves or in comparison to each other, it is
           clear that it would be necessary also to have propositions about the great and the small
           and the greater and the lesser, both generally and specifically; for example, [about]
           what is the greater or lesser good or injustice or justice, and similarly about other qual-
           ities.°4 The subjects about which it is necessary to frame propositions have [now] been
           stated. Next we must distinguish between each in specific terms; that is, what deliber-
           ation, and what epideictic speeches, and thirdly, what lawsuits, are concerned with.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
               1. Aristotle argues that the function of rhetoric is not to persuade but to discover the avail-
                  able means of persuasion. Explain how “persuasion” and “discovering the means of per-
                  suasion” are distinct. Then, explain how the distinction affects the scope and purpose of
                  the rhetor’s/professional writer's work?


           82 The advantageous, the just, the honorable, and their opposites.
           83 The propositions inherent in the underlying syllogism are not necessarily all expressed in the related en-
           thymeme; some may be assumed.
           *4 The subjects of propositions common to all species of rhetoric are thus the possible and impossible, past fact
           (or its nonexistence), future fact (or its nonexistence), and degree of magnitude or importance. These are dis-
           cussed further in 2.19.
                       Aristotle   = Excerpts from      “Book VI, Intellectual Virtue” in Nicomachean Ethics                               37


   2. According to Aristotle's characterization, rhetoric is a generalizable art that, when applied
      to particular situations, helps guide speaking/writing. Briefly explain this characterization of
      rhetoric. Then, discuss what professional writers gain from an art of rhetoric, as well as the
      limitations such an art poses for professional writers.
   3. Aristotle argues that “rhetoric is a certain kind of offshoot [paraphues] of dialectic and of
      ethical studies (which it is just to call politics).” Referring to this passage, found in Chapter
      2, section 7, as well as others, summarize the relationship that Aristotle builds between
      rhetoric and other arts, sciences, and practices.
   4. Identify and explain the functions of rhetoric as argued by Aristotle. Refer to specific passages.



    FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
    Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
    Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
    lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
    in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
    the field itself.
    1. science
    2. induction
    3. syllogism
    4. art
    5. the variable
    6. the invariable
    7. practical wisdom
    8. deliberation
    9. virtue

 DOSER   SHORE   HER    SSSIGEYREHREHFIHOHERGTHUHOBALHASERCEAHO   ASE OUEAAHEHAETHO          OHHH   TRE   THEHARESHOHCHRIFHDHHHHBORE



   lnseapaen aS FROM                           Lysavers VI, nee
    VIRTUE” IN NICOMACHEAN                                                 ETHICS:
    THE CHIEF INTELLECTUAL                                            VIRTUES
   BORDER        ERFEREREESAREDER
                          SEH AEHMERSEDRAOTSESHHEHEHEHE              DHE   ROROEHE   OH EH    HHO HOHE    EHSHHR   HEHE   RESHE HHO   EY



    ARISTOTLE translated by DAVID ROSS

SCIENCE—DEMONSTRATIVE                                    KNOWLEDGE                            OF THE
NECESSARY AND ETERNAL
3. Let us begin, then, from the beginning, and discuss these states once more. Let it
be assumed that the states by virtue of which the soul possesses truth by way of affir-
mation or denial are five in number, i.e. art, scientific knowledge, practical wisdom,
philosophic wisdom, intuitive reason; we do not include judgment and opinion be-
cause in these we may be mistaken.
     Now what scientific knowledge is, if we are to speak exactly and not follow mere
similarities, is plain from what follows. We all suppose that what we know is not even

Source: From The Nicomachean Ethics by Aristotle, translated by David Ross (World's Classics, 1980), pp. 140-143.
Reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
38   Chapter 1 #® What Is Rhetoric?



           capable of being otherwise; of things capable of being otherwise we do not know,
           when they have passed outside our observation, whether they exist or not. Therefore
           the object of scientific knowledge is of necessity. Therefore it is eternal; for things
           that are of necessity in the unqualified sense are all eternal; and things that are eter-
           nal are ungenerated and imperishable. Again, every science is thought to be capable
           of being taught, and its object of being learned. And all teaching starts from what is
           already known, as we maintain in the Analytics alsc; for it proceeds sometimes
           through induction and sometimes by syllogism. Now induction is the starting-point
           which knowledge even of the universal presupposes, while syllogism proceeds from
           universals. There are therefore starting-points from which syllogism proceeds, which
           are not reached by syllogism; it is therefore by induction that they are acquired.
           Scientific knowledge is, then, a state of capacity to demonstrate, and has the other
           limiting characteristics which we specify in the Analytics, for it is when a man be-
           lieves in a certain way and the starting-points are known to him that he has scientific
           knowledge, since if they are not better known to him than the conclusion, he will
           have his knowledge only incidentally.
               Let this, then, be taken as our account of scientific knowledge.


           ART—KNOWLEDGE                OF HOW TO MAKE THINGS
           4. In the variable are included both things made and things done; making and acting
           are different (for their nature we treat even the discussions outside our school as reli-
           able); so that the reasoned state of capacity to act is different from the reasoned state
           of capacity to make. Hence too they are not included one in the other; for neither is
           acting making nor is making acting. Now since architecture is an art and is essentially
           a reasoned state of capacity to make, and there is neither any art that is not such a
           state nor any such state that is not an art, art is identical with a state of capacity to
           make, involving a true course of reasoning. All art is concerned with coming into be-
           ing, i.e. with contriving and considering how something may come into being which
           is capable of either being or not being, and whose origin is in the maker and not in
           the thing made; for art is concerned neither with things that are, or come into being,
           by necessity, nor with things that do so in accordance with nature (since these have
           their origin in themselves). Making and acting being different, art must be a matter
           of making, not of acting. And in a sense chance and art are concerned with the same
           objects; as Agathon says, “art loves chance and chance loves art.” Art, then, as has
           been is a state concerned with making, involving a true course of reasoning, and lack
           of art on the contrary is a state concerned with making, involving a false course of
           reasoning; both are concerned with the variable.


           PRACTICAL WISDOM—KNOWLEDGE OF HOW
           TO SECURE THE ENDS OF HUMAN LIFE
           5. Regarding practical wisdom we shall get at the truth by considering who are the
           persons we credit with it. Now it is thought to be the mark of a man of practical
           wisdom to be able to deliberate well about what is good and expedient for himself,
           not in some particular respect, e.g. about what sorts of things conduce to health or
           to strength, but about what sorts of thing conduce to the good life in general. This
               Aristotle   = Excerpts from “Book VI, Intellectual Virtue” in Nicomachean Ethics      39


is shown by the fact that we credit men with practical wisdom in some particular
respect when they have calculated well with a view to some good end which is one
of those that are not the object of any art. It follows that in the general sense also
the man who is capable of deliberating has practical wisdom. Now no one deliber-
ates about things that are invariable, nor about things that it is impossible for him
to do. Therefore, since scientific knowledge involves demonstration, but there is no
demonstration of things whose first principles are variable (for all such things
might actually be otherwise), and since it is impossible to deliberate about things
that are of necessity, practical wisdom cannot be scientific knowledge nor art; not
science because that which can be done is capable of being otherwise, not art be-
cause action and making are different kinds of things. The remaining alternative,
then, is that it is a true and reasoned state of capacity to act with regard to the
things that are good or bad for man. For while making has an end other than itself,
action cannot; for good action itself is its end. It is for this reason that we think
Pericles and men like him have practical wisdom, viz. because they can see what is
good for themselves and what is good for men in general; we consider that those
can do this who are good at managing households or states. (This is why we call
temperance (sophrosune) by this name; we imply that it preserves one’s practical
wisdom (sozousa tan phronsin). Now what it preserves is a judgment of the kind we
have described. For it is not any and every judgment that pleasant and painful ob-
jects destroy and pervert, e.g. the judgment that the triangle has or has not its an-
gles equal to two right angles, but only judgments about what is to be done. For the
originating causes of the things that are done consist in the end at which they are
aimed; but the man who has been ruined by pleasure or pain forthwith fails to see
any such originating cause—to see that for the sake of this or because of this he
ought to choose and do whatever he chooses and does; for vice is destructive of the
originating cause of action.)
    Practical wisdom, then, must be a reasoned and true state of capacity to act with
regard to human goods. But further, while there is such a thing as excellence in art,
there is no such thing as excellence in practical wisdom; and in art he who errs will-
ingly is preferable, but in practical wisdom, as in the virtues, he is the reverse. Plainly,
then, practical wisdom is a virtue and not an art. There being two parts of the soul
that can follow a course of reasoning, it must be the virtue of one of the two, i.e. of
that part which forms opinions; for opinion is about the variable and so is practical
wisdom. But yet it is not only a reasoned state; this is shown by the fact that a state of
that sort may forgotten but practical wisdom cannot.

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. Prepare a table or matrix that captures the distinctions between science, art, and practical
    wisdom as outlined by Aristotle, and be prepared to discuss your table/matrix in class.
  2. Characterize what rhetoric would be if it were categorized as a science, an art, and a prac-
     tice/action. Then, compare and contrast the three depictions, drawing out the key simi-
     larities and differences.
  3. Aristotle used the variable and invariable as one set of features to distinguish the virtues.
     Referring to other readings in this chapter, and perhaps sources outside this book with
     which you are familiar, argue whether you consider rhetoric to be concerned with the
     variable or the invariable, and explain the impact you see such a distinction making on
     what rhetoric is and is not.
40   Chapter 1 #® What Is Rhetoric?


            SOCRGPSSTSHEHHHEREHOELTRS         evans                        SERVES    RERESOTHT   TH LOHRVSRGHEHHTHETERFEHHEHELEECHHHRLEHE
                                                                                                                                        DE


                 FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
                 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
                 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
                 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
                 in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
                 the field itself.
                 1. epideictic
                 2. deliberative
                 3. judicial
                 4. invention
                 5. arrangement
                 6. style
                 7. memory
                 8. delivery
                 9. six parts of discourse

            ee                                                     SHOE   THESE   LEAOOSAHHH     KOREA   HHOERISSSSEHESTHERFHESEHRHETHRTZES



                 EXCERPTS FROM1 BooK I, RHETORICA
             AD HERENNIUM
                       HERE   ESEHEBE   ARH EKREHR OES   HGAGHEH   OTE               eee          SHOVELS   SHARE   ERE   SeePeoensteaweteres



            ~ MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO Trent eG ee
              HARRY CAPLAN

           BOOK I
           1 |. My private affairs keep me so busy that I can hardly find enough leisure to devote
           to study, and the little that is vouchsafed to me | have usually preferred to spend on
           philosophy. Yet your desire, Gaius Herennius, has spurred me to compose a work on
           the Theory of Public Speaking, lest you should suppose that in a matter which con-
           cerns you | either lacked the will or shirked the labour. And I have undertaken this
           project the more gladly because I knew that you had good grounds in wishing to learn
           rhetoric, for it is true that copiousness and facility in expression bear abundant fruit,
           if controlled by proper knowledge and a strict discipline of the mind.
                   That is why I have omitted to treat those topics which, for the sake of futile self-
           assertion, Greek writers? have adopted. For they, from fear of appearing to know too
           little, have gone in quest of notions irrelevant to the art, in order that the art might
           seem more difficult to understand. I, on the other hand, have treated those topics
           which seemed pertinent to the theory of public speaking. I have not been moved by
           hope of gain? or desire for glory, as the rest have been, in undertaking to write, but

           Source: Reprinted by permission of the publishers and Trustees of the Loeb Classical Library from Cicero: Volume | ~
           Rhetorica and Herenium, Loeb Classical Library Volume L 403, translated by Harry Caplan, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
           University Press, 1954, pp. 3-11. The Loeb Classical Library ® is a registered trademark of the President and Fellows of
           Harvard College.
           4 The beginning of Book 4 further sets forth the author's attitude to the Greek writers on rhetoric (who these
           are specifically is uncertain); cf. also 3. xxiii. 38. For his attitude to philosophical studies see the end of Book 4.
           5 Apparently textbooks on public speaking sold well; see Theodor Birt, Rhein. Mus. 72 (1917/18). 311-16.
                                                     Cicero     ® Excerpts from Book I, Rhetorica Ad Herennium                41


have done so in order that, by my painstaking work, I may gratify your wish. To avoid
prolixity, I shall now begin my discussion of the subject, as soon as | have given you
this one injunction: Theory without continuous practice in speaking is of little avail;
from this you may understand that the precepts of theory here offered ought to be ap-
plied in practice.
     2 II. The task of the public speaker is to discuss capably those matters which law
and custom have fixed for the uses of citizenship, and to secure as far as possible the
agreement of his hearers.* There are three kinds! of causes which the speaker must
treat: Epideictic, Deliberative, and Judicial.¢ The epideictic kind is devoted to the
praise or censure of some particular person. The deliberative consists in the discus-
sion of policy and embraces persuasion and dissuasion.‘ The judicial is based on legal
controversy, and comprises criminal prosecution or civil suit, and defence.s
     Now I shall explain what faculties the speaker should possess, and then show the
proper means of treating these causes.)
     3 The speaker, then, should possess the faculties of Invention, Arrangement,
Style, Memory, and Delivery.! Invention is the devising of matter, true or plausible,
that would make the case convincing.) Arrangement is the ordering and distribution
of the matter, making clear the place to which each thing is to be assigned. Style is
the adaptation of suitable words and sentences to the matter devised. Memory is the




© The definition is that of Hermagoras, to whom the function (epyov) of the perfect orator is TO TeBEV
TOMtiKOV Cyto Siat1Becbon Kate 10 evbexOuEVOV MELOTLKDS . See Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Rhet. 62,
ed. Fabricius, 2. 150. Cf. Cecero, De Inv. 1. v. 6.
d yévn.
© &TlSELKTIKOV, OVEBOVAEDTLKOV, SUKHVIKOV. The scheme is Aristotelian (rhet. 1. 3, 1358b) but in essence
older. The author’s emphasis in the first two books, on the judicial kind, is characteristically Hellenistic (e.g.,
Herrnagorean). The better tradition indicates that originally rhetoric was concerned with the judicial kind, and
was later extended to the other two fields. For a study of the three genera see D. A. G. Hinks, Class. Quarterly 30
(1936). 170-6. Cf. Cicero, De Inv. 1. v. 7.
f tpoTpORH avd &oTpONT.
8 KOLTIYOPTG,, SK], aTOAOYa.
h 2. ii. 2 below.
‘ evpeoic, TaEIC or olKovoptar, A€EIG or EpuNveta or HpGorE, Lv{UN, DmoKpLOLG. The pre-Aristotelian
rhetoric, represented by the Rhet. Ad Alexandrum, treated the first three (without classifying them); Aristotle
would add Delivery (Rhet. 3. 1, 1403b), and his pupil Theophrastus did so (see note on 3. xi. 19 below). When
precisely in the Hellenistic period Memory was added as a fifth division by the Rhodian or the Pergamene
school, we do not know. These faculties (res; see also 1. ii. 3) are referred to in 2. i. 1 below (cf. 1.iii.4) as the
speaker’s functions (officia = epyo. TOV pNtOpOS). Quintilian, 3. 3. 11ff., considers them as departments or con-
stituent elements of the art (paries rhetorices) rather than as opera (= officia); so also here at 3. i. 1, 3. viii. 15, 3.
xvi. 28, and Cicero, De Invi. 1. vii. 9. epyov is an Aristotelian concept (cf. the definition of rhetoric in Rhet. 1.
1-2, 1355b), and Aristotle was the first to classify the (major) functions. Our author here gives the usual order
of the divisions; so also Cicero, De Oratore 1. 31. 142. Diogenes Laertius, 7. 43, presents the Stoic scheme:
Invention, Style (pdo1c), Arrangement, and Delivery. A goodly number of rhetorical systems were actually
based on these epyot (e.g., in most part Cicero’s and Quintilian’s); others were based on the divisions of the dis-
course (Opto. AGyou). See K. Barwick, hermes 57 (1922). 1 ff.; Friedrich Solmsen, Amer. Journ. Phiolo. 62
(1941). 35-50, 169-90. Our author conflates the two schemes he has inherited; see especially 1. ii. 3-iii. 4, 2. i.
 1-ii. 2, and the Introduction to the present volume, p. xviii.
i The concept goes back at least as far as Plato (e.g., Phaedrus 236 A); see Aristotle, Rhet. 1. 2 (1355b), on find-
ing artistic proofs.
42   Chapter 1 #® What Is Rhetoric?



           firm retention in the mind of the matter, words, and arrangement. Delivery is the
           graceful regulation of voice, countenance, and gesture.
                All these faculties we can acquire by three means: Theory, Imitation, and
           Practice.‘ By theory is meant a set of rules that provide a definite method and system
           of speaking. Imitation stimulates us to attain, in accordance with a studied method,
           the effectiveness of certain models in speaking. Practice is assiduous exercise and ex-
           perience in speaking.
               Since, then, I have shown what causes the speaker should treat and what kinds of
           competence he should possess, it seems that | now need to indicate how the speech
           can be adapted to the theory of the speaker’s function.
               4 ]II. Invention is used for the six parts of a discourse: the Introduction,
           Statement of Facts, Division, Proof, Refutation, and Conclusion.! The Introduction
           is the beginning of the discourse, and by it the hearer’s mind is prepared™ for atten-
           tion. The Narration or Statement of Facts sets forth the events that have occurred or
           might have occurred." By means of the Division we make clear what matters are
           agreed upon and what are contested, and announce what points we intend to take up.
           Proof is the presentation of our arguments, together with their corroboration.°

           k téyvn (also nafdeta, emotiun, UGOnot<, scientia, doctrina), u{unotc, Youvaocra (also GOKNOIG, HEAETN,
           eumeipta, ovvnGer0., declamatio). The usual triad, Nature (votc, nature, ingenium, facultas), Theory, and
           Practice, can be traced back to Protagoras, Plato (Phaedrus 269 D), and Isocrates (e.g., Antid. 187; Adv. Soph.
           14-18, where Imitation is also included). Cf. also Aristotle in Diogenes Laertius 5. 18; Cicero, De Inv. 1. i. 2.
           De Oratore 1. 4. 14; Dionysius Halic. in Syrianus, Scholia Hermog., ed. Rabe, 1. 4-5; Tacitus, Dialog. de Orator.,
           ch. 33; Plutarch, De liberis educ. 4 (2 A); and see Paul Shorey, Trans. Am. Pilol. Assn. 40 (1909). 185-201.
           Imitation is presumed to have been emphasized in the Pergamene school of rhetors under Stoic influence.
           Quintilian, 3. 5. 1, tells us that it was classed by some writers as a fourth element, which he yet subordinates to
           Theory. On Imitation cf. Antonius in Cicero, de Oratore 2. 21. 89 ff.; Dionysius halic., De Imitat. (Opuscula 2.
           197-217, ed. Usener-Rader-macher); Quintilian, 10. 1. 20 ff.; Eduard Stemplinger Das Plagiat in der Griech.
           Lit., Leipzig and Berlin, 1912, pp. 81 ff.; Kroll, “Rhetorik”, coll. 1113 ff.; Paulus Otto, Quaestiones selectae ad li-
           bellum qui est TEP1 VYOUG spectantes, diss. Kiel, 1906, pp. 6-19; G. C. Fiske, Lucilius and Horace, Madison,
           1920, ch. 1; J. F. D’Alton, Roman Literary Theory and Criticism, Longon, New York, and Toronto, 1931, pp. 426
           ff. Richard McKeon, “Literary Criticism and the Concept of Imitation in Antiquity,” Mod. Phiol. 34, 1 (1936).
           1-35, and esp. pp. 26 ff.; D. L. Clark, “Imitation : Theory and Practice in roman Rhetoric,” Quart. Journ.
           Speech 37, 1 (1951). 11-22. “Exercise” refers to the progymnasmata, of which our treatise and Cicero’s De Inv.
           show the first traces in Latin rhetoric, and to the “suasoriae” (deliberations) and “controversiae” (causae) in
           which the treatise abounds. See also 4. xliv. 59 (Refining). The divorce between praeexercitamenta and
           exercitations belongs to the Augustan period.
           ''The author’s treatment of the parts of a discourse differs from that of Aristotle, who, in Rhet. 3. 13 (1414a) ff.,
           discusses them—Proem, Statement of Facts, Proof, and Conclusion—with all three kinds of oratory in view,
           not only the judicial, under Arrangement. Note that Invention is applied concretely to the parts of the dis-
           course; in 1. xi. 18 ff. below the Issues are subjoined to Proof and Refutation. Cf. Cicero, De Inv. 1. xiv. 19.
           The Stoic scheme included Proem, Statement of Facts, Replies to Opponents, and Conclusion (Diogenes
           Laertius 7. 43).
           ™ rapacKkevacetar.The concept if Isocratean. Cf. Rhet. Ad Alex., ch. 29 (1436a); Dionysius Halic., De Lys.
           17; Anon. Seg. 5 and 9 (Spengel-Hammer | [2]. 353-4); Rufus 4 (Spengel-Hammer 1 [2]. 399); Anon., in
           Rabe, Proleg. Sylloge, p. 62.
           » This definition is translated directly from a Greek original; see Hermogenes, Progymn. 2 (ed. rabe, p. 4),
           Syrianus, Scholia Hermog. (ed. Rabe, p. 4), Syrianus, Scholia Hermog. (ed. Rabe 2. 170), Theon 4 (Spengel 2.
           78). Cf. Cicero, De Inv. 1. xix. 27.
           ° Cf. Cicero, De Inv. 1. xxiv. 34.
           P Cf. Cicero, De Inv. 1. xlii. 78 (reprehensio).
                                        Cicero   = Excerpts from Book I, Rhetorica Ad Herennium   43



Refutation is the destruction of our adversaries’ arguments.? The Conclusion is the
end of the discourse, formed in accordance with the principles of the art.
     Along with the speaker’s functions, in order to make the subject easier to under-
stand, | have been led also to discuss the parts of a discourse, and to adapt these to the
theory of Invention.    It seems, then, that | must at this juncture first discuss the
Introduction.4

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. Referring to the pages you have from Book | of Rhetorica Ad Herennium, summarize the
     function and scope of rhetoric. Compare and contrast what Rhetorica Ad Herennium puts
     forward with what Aristotle’s Rhetoric puts forward.
  2. Using the little bit of Rhetorica Ad Herennium you have available here and any other
     sources from this chapter, support, contend with, or modify how Foss, Foss, and Trapp (in
     the first reading from the chapter) represent Roman rhetoric.
  3. Summarize the way Rhetorica Ad Herennium states rhetoric can be learned. Locate if and
     how other sources from this chapter identify how rhetoric can be learned, comparing and
     contrasting these sources with Rhetorica Ad Herennium. Finally, explain how what you
     discover about the education of the rhetor can be applied to your own education.


4 MPOAGYOG, probably.
                  CHAPTER            1

                  Projects
          1. Chapter 6 of Professional Writing and Rhetoric argues that professional writing is defined, in
             great part, by its focus on readers or users; that is, professional writing and rhetoric is user-
             or reader-centered. Using the readings from Chapter 1, as well as other primary and sec-
             ondary rhetorical sources you find through independent research, examine (meaning sup-
              port, contend with, and/or modify) the following claim: Rhetoric is an audience-, reader-, or
              user-centered art.
            . Despite the fact that rhetoric is one of the oldest disciplines and was traditionally one of the
              core liberal arts, you will probably find yourself in many situations where you are asked to
              explain what rhetoric is. Your family will probably ask you, as they wonder what it is you are
              studying in this course. Interviewers will probably ask you, as they wonder what rhetoric
              adds to you as a potential employee. And if you happen to mention “rhetoric” to people at
              work, they will probably ask you what it is, also.
     EHASHHOHHEHHOSHHOHEHSHFHESGHSHHAOHOTOSHETAESHEREHEEED
     COMETS

              Construct a scenario in which you might be asked to define rhetoric for someone. For this
              scenario, develop a text that defines the discipline. Since several scenarios that might call for
              a definition of rhetoric would not also typically call for a written document (i.e., they would
              call for a verbal response), you should approach this project creatively. Consider a variety of
              “texts” (maybe a movie-short, a children’s book, a cartoon, or a taped dramatic dialogue)
              you could produce.
            . Obviously, four selected readings have not covered the entire discipline of rhetoric. There re-
              main numerous issues/topics, rhetoricians, theoretical approaches, and histories that have
              not been represented, or represented well enough by the readings in this chapter.
              As a class, and with the help of your instructor, develop a list of issues/topics, rhetoricians,
              theoretical approaches, and/or histories that you could research further. Individually or in
              small groups, choose a research area, develop a research question into which you will in-
              quire, and write a research plan to help guide your inquiry. Your aim should be to develop,
              as a Class, a set of oral and written reports that you can bring back to the class in order to
              develop a more robust sense of rhetoric. The written reports should be published (in either
              print or online form) and incorporated into the class as additional readings/resources.




44
eesoeeures

e
e
2
>
e
°
e




           WhatIs the
2
e
®
@
2
e
®
e
°



           Relationship Between
s
e
2
e
°
2
.




           Professional Writing
e
2
.
°
e
°
@




           and Rhetoric?
°
.
2
2
2
7
2
a
°
e
*




    INTRODUCTION
    The title of this book, Professional Writing and Rhetoric, can be read in one of two
    ways. You might read the title and think the book is about two different fields that are
    telated: professional writing as one field and rhetoric as a separate but related field.
    Or, you might read it and think it is about an interdisciplinary field: professional writ-
    ing and rhetoric as integrally joined in a way that forms a new field of study and work.
    The readings in Chapter 2, together, examine some of the relationships between pro-
    fessional writing and rhetoric.
         Questions you should consider as you read these selections are as follows:

        ¢ How is professional writing affected when writing is understood as socially situ-
          ated or contextualized?
        ¢ How is professional writing affected when writing is understood as a practice?
        © How is professional writing affected when writing is understood as a productive
          art?
        ® How is professional writing affected when the writer is understood to be a
          rhetor and an author?
        ° How is professional writing affected when it is understood as organizationally
          situated authorship?

    Each of these questions arises when professional writing is considered a rhetorical
    practice and art.
         One of the concerns of rhetoric is understanding the relationship between com-
    munication and specific situations, what we often refer to as the rhetorical situation.
    Some, for instance, have argued that rhetorical situations are external realities that
    rhetors walk into, realities that create moments for rhetorical action. In other words,
    rhetorical situations exist prior to speaking or writing. Others have argued that

                                                                                                 45
46   Chapter 2     *   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           thetorical situations are “invented” in rhetors’ speeches or texts. According to this
           position, audiences and readers enter into whatever rhetorical situations the rhetor
           creates for them. In other words, rhetorical situations do not precede speaking or
           writing; they are created through speaking and writing. Lester Faigley, in
           “Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective,” examines this issue as it relates to
           professional writing.
                Another issue within rhetoric questions whether rhetoric is a productive art—a
           way of making texts—or if it is better understood as a practice—a way of doing ox act-
           ing. In Chapter 1, you read about how Aristotle defined rhetoric in terms of produc-
           tive art and practice, and though Aristotle seems to argue that rhetoric is a produc-
           tive art, his works, as well as others within the rhetorical tradition, seem to suggest
           that rhetoric is also a form of practice. Is professional writing one or the other, or a
           combination of the two? Such a question has great impact on what professional writ-
           ers are, do, and are responsible for. Carolyn Miller, in “What’s               Practical about
           Technical Writing?” examines some of the ways this issue affects how we understand
           who professional writers are, what they do, and what they should do.
                A third issue that has been central to rhetoric over the ages is defining what it
           means to be a rhetor or a writer. When we think about rhetors and/or writers, a great
           range of terms can be used to define such people, each with varying degrees of author-
           ity: scribe, orator, poet(ess), stenographer, scholar, wordsmith,          leader, editor, pub-
           lisher, document specialist, and author are just some of the terms we might conjure.
           Which one of these is best suited to the professional writer? And once we choose one,
           in what ways does the term affect what we consider part of the writer’s expertise?
           These are some of the issues taken up by Susan Regli in “Whose Ideas?: The
           Technical Writer's Expertise in Inventio” and Jennifer Slack, David Miller, and
           Jeffrey Doak in “The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power,
           Authority.”
                The issues and questions that have been part of the long history of rhetoric, thus,
           have a great deal of relevance to professional writing. These few selected readings offer
           only a glimpse at how the two fields are related, but when examined together, they
           point to a field of professional writing and rhetoric that can be defined as “organiza-
           tionally situated authorship.” As you read the selections in this chapter, reflect on this
           one broad question: “How would you define organizationally situated authorship?”




                 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
                 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
                 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
                 1. communicative chains
                 2. writing as a social act
                 3. discourse community
                                                       Faigley   » Nonacademic           Writing: The Social Perspective      47



 NoONA ACADEMIC                                 WRITING:
     THE SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
 SOROS   OT   STEHT   RDE   SSCR SEES   ESOS   ORED   SERESGCOS HERSHRESE
                                                                 HOCH AHSHE SER TH SP RORHHEOHRELKE
                                                                                      HAHHAS                           RAED


    LESTER FAIGLEY
    University of Texas at Austin


d bs past several years have seen a great deal of interest in the writing people do as
     part of their work. As other chapters in this book will indicate, this job-related
writing is worthy of our interest and serious study. In exploring this sort of writing, re-
searchers can take one or a combination of three major theoretical perspectives—the
textual perspective, the individual perspective, and the social perspective. In this chap-
ter I discuss the foundations of the social perspective and how it might contribute to
research in nonacademic writing. Although the social perspective is least well estab-
lished, I will argue that it can be a fruitful perspective from which to study nonacade-
mic writing. To illustrate the three theoretical perspectives, I will refer to the follow-
ing four examples of writing situations in nonacademic settings.

       ¢ An editor working for a major publisher in New York neglects to answer a
         query from an editor in another division. A few days later she writes a brief
         memo on the company’s memo stationery, apologizing for her failure to re-
         spond. She uses the excuse that the request became buried on her desk. She
         follows the company’s memo format, but she adds a letterlike closing that says:
         “Excavatingly yours.”
      ¢ A supervisor of bank examiners in Colorado has the responsibility of teaching
         newly hired examiners how to write reports. Since examiners travel exten-
         sively and are not well paid, his staff is young and turns over rapidly. The su-
         pervisor is now revising an examiner’s report on a small bank in southwestern
         Colorado that has made several questionable loans. In the margins he notes
         several problems with the report: the lack of reasons for several conclusions,
         the omission of important factual details, and general wordiness. At the end he
         explains to the young examiner why the overall tone is inappropriate for an ex-
         aminer’s report. He reminds the examiner that the report will be read at a board
         of directors’ meeting and that it will be the basis for any reform in the bank’s man-
         agement. He tells him to stick to the specific regulations that were violated and
         to avoid derogatory remarks about the practices of rural banks.
      @ A nurse in Boston changes jobs and begins work at a psychiatric hospital. At
         his previous job at a large general hospital, the nurse’s section of a patient’s
         chart was a checklist. The psychiatric hospital, however, requires discursive
         notes on the chart. The nurse photocopies a few examples during his first day
         on the new job. He uses these examples as models when writing the chart for a
         schizophrenic patient. He observes that the notes are written in phrases and


Source: Faigley, Lester. “Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective." Writing in Nonacademic Settings, ed. Lee Odell and
Dixie Goswami, 1985, pp. 231-248. Copyright 1985 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted with permission.
48   Chapter 2 =   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



                   that certain abbreviations occur frequently, such as pt. for patient. He begins
                   describing his patient’s behavior:
                       Very anxious and agitated, seclusive to room except when preoccupied with
                       phone. Poor personal hygiene. With much coaxing, pt. finally took a bath but re-
                       fused to wash hair. Pt. very paranoid. States “Someone is trying to burn down my
                       trailer.”

                   A wildlife biologist works for an environmental engineering firm in Houston.
                   She serves as project manager for an ecological survey of the proposed site for a
                   liquefied natural-gas terminal on Matagorda Bay in Texas. She is part of a team
                   that is preparing an environmental-impact statement for a major oil company,
                   and she is composing on a computer the final report on terrestrial ecology. This
                   report will be submitted with other reports on aquatic ecology and hydrology.
                   Major subsections of the report include (1) wildlife habitats, (2) checklists of
                   species, (3) endangered species, and (4) commercially important species. In
                   writing the “checklists of species” subsection, the biologist relies on several
                   master checklist files stored on computer diskettes. She loads the master check-
                   list file for birds, a file that includes all species known to the Texas coast. She
                   edits the file using her field notes on the birds she sighted while visiting the
                   site, marking either “present,” “absent,” or “probable” beside each species. The
                   biologist knows that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) gives spe-
                   cial attention to endangered flora and fauna, and she includes in the report a
                   separate subsection for habitats of endangered species. She documents her own
                   findings with independently published sightings.


           PERSPECTIVES FOR RESEARCH
           Each of the writing situations just described—the editor’s memo, the bank examiner’s
           report, the nurse’s notes, and the environmental-impact statement—differs substan-
           tially from typical classroom writing tasks. An overriding question for researchers of
           nonacademic writing is how these differences might best be understood and de-
           scribed. The three perspectives mentioned at the beginning of this chapter represent
           general lines of research that attempt to answer this question. They are, in fact, col-
           lections of approaches, collapsed and simplified here for purposes of comparison.

           The Textual Perspective
           The primary concerns of linguistics and literary criticism during much of the twenti-
           eth century have been the description of formal features in language and texts.
           Following from the assumptions of these traditions, much writing research has ana-
           lyzed features in texts. This line of inquiry has long been dominant in the study of
           business and technical writing. One goal of this research has been to describe features
           that typify particular genres, such as what elements appear in the introduction of a
           marketing forecast. Another goal has been to produce more “readable” texts.
           Readability has been defined traditionally in terms of quantifiable linguistic features
           such as sentence length and word length—the basis for the popular readability for-
           mulas of Flesch and Gunning (reviewed in Selzer, 1983). Only recently have discus-
                                            Faigley   = Nonacademic   Writing: The Social Perspective   49


     sions of readability included factors such as the suitability of texts for potential read-
     ers (see Redish, et al., chapter 3, this volume).
          If researchers who take the textual perspective were asked to examine the four
     situations I cited at the beginning, they would collect and analyze the texts the writ-
     ers produce. They might, for example, compared the specialized vocabularies of the
     environmental-impact statement, the examiner's report, and the nurse’s notes. They
     might compute T-unit length and clause length for each example. They might ana-
     lyze the topics of individual sentences and determine how these sentence topics form
     topical progressions. They might, for example, study documents’ tables of contents in
     order to identify conventions of organization. They might look at errors in the nurse’s
     writing and measure “improvement.” And they might comment on stylistic varia-
     tions such as the closing of the editor’s memo. Results of these studies would be used
     to make generalizations about specific kinds of texts—generalizations that are some-
     times stated prescriptively as rules for style and format.

     The Individual Perspective
     This perspective has been strongly influenced by recent theory and research in psy-
     chology. For much of this century, linguistics and psychology in the United States
     were dominated by behaviorism, which declared mental strategies to be unobservable
     and beyond scientific investigation. During the 1950s and 1960s, however, behavior-
     ist assumptions encountered serious objections. In linguistics, Noam Chomsky argued
     persuasively that behaviorist theory could not account for the complexity of human
     language acquisition, and thereby changed the direction of American linguistic re-
     search. In psychology, further challenges arose from several sources, two of which
     later became important in the study of writing. The European cognitive-developmen-
     tal tradition—best known through the work of Jean Piaget—influenced American re-
     searchers studying the development of the thinking reflected in children’s writing. A
     second tradition of cognitive psychology in the United States engaged researchers in
     creating general theoretical models of the reasoning that attends the writing process.
     Both these new lines of inquiry in psychology directed the attention of some writing
     researchers to strategies writers use in composing. For example, Emig (1971) tried to
     identify some of the strategies high school students used when they composed. Emig’s
     work was followed by numerous other studies of the composing processes of elemen-
     tary, secondary, and college students. The 1970s movement toward process-oriented
     inquiry into how children and young adults learn to write eventually led to studies of
     how nonacademic writers compose (e.g., Gould, 1980).
          For researchers who take the individual perspective, a text is not so much an ob-
     ject as an outcome of an individual’s cognitive processes. The primary attention shifts
     away from the text to an individual writer’s emerging conception of the writing task.
     Researchers taking the individual perspective would likely examine how writers make
 certain choices during composing. They would inquire about writers’ goals in compos-
 ing, either by retrospective interviews or by asking writers to voice their thoughts
 while they composed. They would consider how an individual's formulation of a writ-
 ing task directs the production of the resulting text. For example, researchers might
 observe how the biologist divides the task of writing the environmental impact state-
 ment into segments and what she hopes to accomplish in each section. They might
ee
50   Chapter 2 * What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           observe how the editor at a publishing house goes about creating a persona as she
           writes the memo and how she understands that persona to fulfill a larger purpose—in
           this case, gaining the reader’s acceptance of an oversight. They might study protocols
           of the nurse’s composing or consider the time he devotes to each stage of writing (e.g.,
           Does he ever revise?). They might take the bank examiner’s case as an example of fail-
           ure to develop an appropriate sense of audience. One goal of these studies would be to
           describe the processes that are effective and those that are ineffective so that effective
           strategies can be taught to ineffective writers.

           The Social Perspective
           The social perspective also focuses on the process of composing, but this perspective
           understands process in far broader terms. In the social perspective, writing processes
           do not start with “prewriting” and stop with “revising.” Researchers taking a social
           perspective study how individual acts of communication define, organize, and main-
           tain social groups. They view written texts not as detached objects possessing mean-
           ing on their own, but as links in communicative chains, with their meaning emerging
           from their relationships to previous texts and the present context. The social perspec-
           tive, then, moves beyond the traditional rhetorical concern for audience, forcing re-
           searchers to consider issues such as social roles, group purposes, communal organiza-
           tion, ideology, and finally theories of culture.
                If we consider the examples at the beginning of the chapter, we see that neither
           the textual perspective nor the individual perspective gives us a way to understand
           how a wildlife biologist learns to write an environmental-impact statement, or why
           the nurse’s section of a patient’s chart at one hospital would not require any writing,
           or how the supervisor’s editing of the bank examiner’s report affects the audit of the
           bank and its consequences, or even why the editor’s closing is funny. These questions
           all involve social relations, tensions, or conflicts that go beyond the text as a
                                                                                     physical
           object and the writer as an isolated strategist. To ask these questions is to assume that
           writing, like operating a jackhammer, arguing a lawsuit, or designing an office build-
           ing, is a social act that takes place in a structure of authority, changes constantly as
           society changes, has consequences in the economic and political realms, and shapes
           the writer as much as it is shaped by the writer. Questions like these could be avoided
           as long as researchers studied student compositions, but they arise as soon as we leave
           the academic setting with which we are familiar. Consequently, a writing researcher
           taking the social perspective needs not only new methods of research, but also a the-
         ~ ory that explains how we can participate daily in an all-encompassing social world
           and yet still see the structure of that world. Before turning to questions of research
           methodology from the social perspective, | first will look at how such a theory might
           be constructed.


           FOUNDATIONS FOR A SOCIAL THEORY OF WRITING
           A central tenet of the social perspective is that communication is inextricably Pound
           up in the culture ofa4 particular socIg Dy Piles Be                       writir
                                          Faigley    = Nonacademic     Writing: The Social Perspective   51


Nystrand, 1982). For those of us who have been trained to appreciate literary texts as
works of solitary artistic genius rather than expressions of a culture, the task of de-
scribing a society seems formidable—if not impossible. There is some comfort, how-
ever, in knowing that others ill equipped in theory and method have stumbled onto
vast social questions concerning language and have not only survived but even
      ged basic n¢     s about how we communicate. One such group of explorers—an
appropriate meee here—were anthropological linguists who attempted to de-
scribe the languages of Africa and Asia during the years following World War II.
They found that traditional definitions of language and methods of linguistic analysis
were no better suited for the astonishing diversity of language in newly emerging na-
tions than was the wool clothing earlier explorers wore to the trophics. These lin-
guists met speakers of the “same” language living a few villages apart who could not
understand each other. In many small villages they found that everyone was fluent in
two languages or dialects, and that a speaker’s choice of one of them often conveyed
the social standing of the speaker or listener.
     To cope with this diversity, linguists developed the notion ofa sp
CHS genet Pa                defines as “any      human aggregate   characteriz       reg larand

aperegates by significant ieee in poets — eh 114). This notion of a
speech community became a basis for the new soe ees, of s


small ——          sureaes all residents Oke both Bokmal, one of the two forms
of standard Norwegian, and a local dialect. They found that choices between the two
dialects varied among speakers within the community. In some cases, choices be-
tween the two dialects signaled certain attitudes and beliefs. A similar phenomenon
occurs in my neighborhood in Austin, Texas, where most residents are bilingual in
English and Spanish. My neighbors typically greet each other in Spanish, then often
switch to English if they wish to engage in prolonged conversation, then signal the
conclusion of the conversation by returning to Spanish. Differences in language use
can establish social identity even among speakers of the same language (cf. Hymes,
1972). For example, speakers of English would likely understand the literal meaning
of utterances of inner-city blacks such as “Your momma             so black, she sweat choco-
late,” but they might not understand that such insults comprise a form of verbal play
called the “dozens” (Labov, 1972).
      Although the notion of a speech community offers us some insights into the so-
cial dimensions of writing, the concept of a community connected by writing must be
defined by different criteria. Many of the linguistic markers of speech communities
(e.g., differences nin pronunciation) do not have simple parallels in written language.
Further, written language     is actually a collection    of genres. Written language is com-
posed in and comes      to us through   many     forms—in     shopping lists, in newspapers, in
dictated letters, in scripted  newscasts,   in signs,  in receipts.  As many commentators on
literacy have noted, written     language  can    be understood     outside  the writer’s immedi-
ate community or outside the writer’s         lifetime   (which   is also  true for electronically
recorded spoken language).
     We need, therefore, an alternative concept to accommodate some of the special
circumstances of written language—a concept we might label a discourse community.
52   Chapter 2 « What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           In one sense, all persons literate in a language constitute a discourse community. But
           few, if any, texts are written for everyone who is capable of deciphering the words.
           Texts are almost always written for persons in restricted groups (cf. Bazerman, 1979).
           Persons in these groups may be connected primarily by written texts, as is the case
           with scholars on different continents who participate in a scholarly debate. Or they
           may belong to the same organization that has an in-house language and certain local
           discourse conventions. The key notion is that within a language community, people
           acquire specialized kinds of discourse competence that enable them to participate in
           specialized groups. Members know what is worth communicating, how it can be com-
           municated, what other members of the community are likely to know and believe to
           be true about certain subjects, how other members can be persuaded, and so on.
                 Scholars for a long time have recognized that academic disciplines are a type of
           discourse community, each with its own language, subject matters, and methods of ar-
           gument. In this seminal book, The Use of Argument, Toulmin (1958) theorizes that
           although arguments have basic structural similarity, they also are distinguished by
           fields. He offers academic disciplines as examples of fields, pointing out that patterns
           of arguments in fields such as physics are very different from those in disciplines such
           as history or law. Willard (1983) broadens Toulmin’s account of a field to include in-
           stances of ordinary discourse. In addition to academic disciplines, which Willard calls
           normative fields, Willard distinguishes encounter fields (communication among
           strangers), relation fields (communication among associates, friends, and spouses), and
           issue fields (schools of thought that often cross disciplines such as Freudianism).
           Willard describes fields as rhetorical in operation. Fields sanction what knowledge is
           accepted, what subjects might be investigated, and what kinds of evidence and
           rhetorical appeals are permitted.
                The academic discourse communities receiving the most study to date have been
           the sciences, with most attention coming from an extensive research program in the
           sociology of science (reviewed in Bazerman, 1983). Following Merton’s (1957) obser-
           vation that the growth of scientific knowledge reflects its social organization, many
           researchers have examined groups, subgroups, and hierarchies among scientists.
           Researchers have considered how scientific articles serve the social organization as
           both a means of communication and a means of earning rewards. Hagstrom (1965)
           drew the analogy of the scientific article as a form of primitive “gift giving,” where the
           scientist offers the “gift” with the expectation of receiving some sort of later recogni-
           tion from the community. Latour and Woolgar (1979) argue for a different model,
           where scientists publish to earn credibility, which in turn furthers their interest in the
           “game” of science. Another issue in this research program is the nature of scientific
           knowledge. The old notion of an independent and rational body of scientific knowl-
           edge has collided with many demonstrations of the human construction of scientific
           facts (e.g., Feyerabend, 1975; Toulmin, 1972), and “new” scientific knowledge has
           been shown to emerge from an agreed-on body of old knowledge (e.g., Price, 1963).
                It is tempting to import wholesale the research issues raised in the sociology of
           science for the study of nonacademic writing. But before any such ambitious research
           program can begin, certain questions of definition must be addressed. One of the
           most crucial is how to differentiate academic and nonacademic writing. In examining
           nonacademic writing, we find many overlapping communities. For example, the biol-
                                         Faigley   * Nonacademic    Writing: The Social Perspective   53


ogist writing an environmental-impact statement abides not only by certain discipli-
nary conventions in biology, certain legal forms determined by the Environmental
Protection Agency, and certain unstated and stated conventions particular to her
company, but also by a complex set of conventions of political language (consider the
use of the term endangered species). If the notion of discourse communities is to be il-
luminating, it must not be used without attending to how such communities might be
identified and defined and how communities shape the form and content of specific
texts. Chapter 9 by Miller and Selzer in this volume suggests how analyses of texts
written in specific communities might proceed.
      In the case of academic or professional discourse, it is relatively easy to see writ-
ing as a social activity. It is more difficult to see how a “private” act of writing, such as
an entry in a diary, might be construed as a social act. Take an extreme example,
where the writer of a diary encodes her entries in a cipher that only she knows.
Theoreticians of the social perspective, such as Lev Vygotsky, would argue that such a
coded diary entry would be no less a social act than the environmental-impact state-
ment. Vygotsky (1962) contends that there is no such thing as “private” language, or
even “private” thought:
     Thought development is determined by language, i.e., by the linguistic tools of thought,
     and by the sociocultural experiences of the child ... The child’s intellectual growth is
     contingent on his mastering the social means of thought, that is, language .. . Verbal
     thought is not an innate, natural form of behavior but is determined by a historical-cul-
     tural process [p. 51].

The historical-cultural process to which Vygotsky refers is simply that children do
not learn words from a dictionary but through hearing them uttered in social situa-
tions to convey specific intentions and to achieve specific ends (see Bizzell, 1982).
Words carry the contexts in which they have been used. Granted, Vygotsky does dis-
cuss “inner speech,” but his conception of inner speech is not the same as private lan-
guage. Although inner speech is not voiced, it consists of fragments of speech the
speaker has drawn from the community in which he or she lives. More important, in-
ner speech takes the form of a dialogue, which implies the continuous presence of an
“other.”
      Vygotsky’s contemporary, M. M. Bakhtin, applied these same notions to written
texts. It is not clear whether Bakhtin and Vygotsky knew each other or influenced
each other. (Bakhtin remains mysterious in other ways as well. Apparently some of
his works were published under the names of his associates.) In Marxism and the
Philosophy of Language, originally published under the name V. N. VoloSinov in 1929,
Bakhtin claims the textual perspective (which he calls “abstract objectivism”) dis-
torts the nature of written language by separating a text from its context. Bakhtin
goes on to say that the textual perspective mistakenly assumes that meaning can be
separated from a specific situation, that the textual approach inevitably emphasizes
parts at the expense of the whole. He also faults approaches that center on the indi-
vidual; these approaches he claims, miss the nature of language. Like Vygotsky, he in-
sists that language is dialogic, that a text is not an isolated, monologic utterance, but
“a moment in the continuous process of verbal communication” [VoloSinov, 1973, p.
95]. A text is written in orientation to previous texts of the same kind and on the
54   Chapter 2   =   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           same subjects; it inevitably grows out of some concrete situation; and it inevitably
           provokes some response, even if it is simply discarded. In short, the essence of a
           text—any text—is inextricably tied up in chains of communication and not in the
           linguistic forms on the page or in the minds of individual writers.



           RESEARCH ON WRITING FROM THE SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
           A broadly defined research program that explores writing from the social perspective
           would first examine what constitutes a discourse community. It would probe the fluid
           and multiple nature of discourse communities, and how communities overlap and
           change. Such a research program would examine how a particular discourse commu-
           nity is organized by its interactions and by the texts it produces (see chapter 8 by
           Paradis et al. in this volume). It would examine what subjects are considered appro-
           priate in that community and how those subjects are determined. It would examine
           how genres evolve within a community. Finally, it would investigate how a commu-
           nity sanctions certain methods of inquiry.
                Such a research program would integrate considerations of individual writers
           and particular texts into a broader view of the social functions of writing. It would
           explore how individual writers come to know the beliefs and expectations of other
           members of the community, and how individuals can alter the community’s beliefs
           and expectations. It would consider how individuals cope with texts—how they
           learn to read texts and how to make meaning in texts in a particular community. It
           would investigate how conventions shape and are shaped by the processes of writing
           and reading. It would examine not only how individuals learn to represent them-
           selves in a text, but how that representation emerges in response to a specific situa-
           tion. In addition to the familiar aspects of the composing process, this research pro-
           gram would consider how all language is interaction, how all texts entail contexts,
           and how texts accomplish interactions between writers and readers rather than em-
           bodying meaning entirely by themselves. Consequently, this research program
           would not only examine an individual’s composing processes, but would also follow
           the completed text, examining how it is disseminated, who has access to it, who
           reads it and who doesn’t, what is read, what actions people take upon reading it, and
           how it influences subsequent texts.
                Moreover, this research program would not separate the study of texts from the
           study of technologies used to create texts. These technologies include not only writ-
           ing implements, but also symbol systems and the knowledge to interpret those sys-
           tems. New technologies arise in response to needs, and members of discourse commu-
           nities must know how to apply new technologies to existing functions for writing (see
           chapter 4 by Halpern in this volume; see also Faigley & Miller, 1982; Halpern &
           Liggett, 1984; Williams, 1981). For example, in writing the endangered-species sub-
           section of the environmental-impact statement, the biologist uses computer software
           to form a pie chart that illustrates the percentages of wildlife habitat affected on the
           proposed site. The knowledge that readers use to interpret the pie graph is as critical
           a technology to this particular writing act as the technology that led to the develop-
           ment of the computer hardware and software.
                                       Faigley   = Nonacademic   Writing: The Social Perspective   55


    The central questions for research taking the social perspective are ones that
concern the contexts in which texts are written and read. These questions will be ad-
dressed in theoretical, historical, and empirical research. Theoreticians who adopt
the social perspective can look to a long tradition of scholarship in rhetoric and more
recent work in semiotics (e.g., Barthes, 1968); literary criticism (e.g., Fish, 1980); the
philosophy of science (e.g., Popper, 1963); social psychology (e.g., Vygotsky, 1962);
and cultural anthropology (e.g., Geertz, 1983). Historians can examine the functions
of writing in small communities or the effects of literacy on large ones. Empirical re-
searchers must be able to connect theoretical approaches to the mundane writing
events of everyday life.



POSSIBILITIES FOR EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
In the social study of language, two major lines of empirical inquiry have emerged—
one quantitative and the other qualitative. Both quantitative and qualitative ap-
proaches can be valuable in studying nonacademic writing. The quantitative ap-
proach is exemplified by work in sociolinguistics, such as Labov’s (1966) findings that
certain linguistic features are stratified by social class. The qualitative approach is ex-
emplified by research in anthropology that is collectively known as ethnography (see
chapter 14 by Doheny-Farina and Odell in this volume). Because qualitative research
offers the potential for describing the complex social situation that any act of writing
involves, empirical researchers are likely to use qualitative approaches with increas-
ing frequency.
      But if researchers take a qualitative approach, what do they examine? Let us con-
sider again the situations posed at the beginning of this chapter. In the case of the ed-
itor, researchers might begin with the apparent tension between the constraints of
the memo form and the tone sought by the editor—a tension that prompts innova-
tion. Examining the causes of this tension leads to issues of the use of language by
those whose business is the production of language, the use of language between two
people at the same level of the corporate structure, and the use of language to person-
alize an apparently impersonal form. For example, researchers might collect instances
of personalization (e.g., handwritten additions, capitalization or underlining, second-
person address, private references) and ask writers why they chose to make personal
additions.
    In the case of the bank examiner, researchers might observe, over the course of a
year, the supervisor’s interaction with three or four trainees. In teaching the trainees
how to write examiners’ reports, the supervisor must also teach the trainees about the
social organization of a bank. By understanding the social organization, examiners
can help to correct the problems they uncover. To study how this social knowledge is
transmitted, researchers would record the oral as well as the written communication
between the supervisor and the trainees. They likely would interview trainees at dif-
ferent times to discover how social understanding evolves, and they would be sensi-
tive to the reactions of bankers to the examiners’ reports.
     The case of the nurse also concerns the way writers under someone else’s author-
ity learn the conventions of a community. At one hospital, nurses are allowed only a
56   Chapter 2 =   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



          checklist. At the other, they can—and must—write; but at the same time, they must
           use certain conventions associated with the practice of psychiatric medicine and with
           the particular hospital. Researchers should be interested in how nurses acquire and
           internalize these conventions. Researchers might also wish to observe how these
           written reports are used by physicians in diagnosing and treating patients.
                In the case of the environmental-impact statement, a researcher who takes the
           social point of view might try to identify the sources of the set format for such docu-
           ments. One might also want to consider the effects of this format on the kinds of in-
          formation that can and cannot be considered. Ohmann (1976), for instance, has an-
           alyzed the conventions of the Pentagon papers and their effect on U 'S. policies in
           the Vietnam War. Or one might consider ways in which a specific report differs from
           the conventional format of the environmental-impact statement. Is there a tension,
           traceable in the structure of the statement, between the format and the issues of the
           particular case? For instance, is one section much longer than usual? Is the tone of the
           opening different from previous statements? What is revised in the course of writing,
           and by whom? What cannot be revised?
                All these lines of inquiry spring from three general questions:
                1. What is the social relationship of writers and readers, and how does the text
                   function in this social relationship?
                2. How does this kind of text change over time?
                3. How does the perspective of the observer define and limit the observation of
                   this text?
           This last question forces researchers to consider what it means to observe and what it
           means to interpret. Debates over these issues have occupied cultural anthropologists
           for the past two decades. Anthropologists have developed two broad notions of
           ethnography: an older notion concerned with observation and a newer notion con-
           cerned with interpretation. Both notions are important to the study of nonacademic
           writing.
                The older notion is useful for its focus on how to observe. One anthropologist says
           that ethnography involves the attempt to “record and describe the culturally signifi-
           cant behaviors of a particular society” (Conklin, 1968, p. 172). He goes on to say that

               ideally, this description, an ethnography, requires a long period of intimate study and resi-
               dence in a small, well-defined community, knowledge of the spoken language, and the
               employment of a wide range of observational techniques including prolonged face-to-face
               contacts with members of the local group, direct participation in some of that group’s ac-
               tivities, and a greater emphasis on intensive work with informants than on the use of doc-
               umentary or survey data [p. 172].

           In a traditional conception of ethnography, an anthropologist lives (usually for a year
           or longer) in the culture being studied (usually a technologically primitive culture)
           and collects copious data by observing, interviewing, charting patterns, and collect-
           ing case studies. Although not every method might be used, the ethnographer will
           surely use more than one method in collecting data, and the chief data source will be
           the ethnographer’s diary. The ethnographer tries to avoid value judgments and aban-
           dons assumptions from his or her own culture. Hymes (1980) says that ethnographic
           investigation is always open-ended.
                                       Faigley   * Nonacademic    Writing: The Social Perspective   57


    The newer notion of ethnography is sometimes called interpretative anthropology.
One of its chief practitioners is Geertz, whose essay, “Thick Description: Toward an
Interpretative Theory of Culture” (in Geertz, 1973), argues that a culture can be
“read” not by starting with abstract concepts but by first microscopically examining
the culture’s most salient activities. Geertz’s famous essay on the Balinese cockfight
(1973) demonstrates how a'single event can provide “a metasocial commentary upon
the whole matter of assorting human beings into fixed hierarchical ranks and then or-
ganizing the major part of collective existence around the assortment” (p. 448). The
function of the cockfight “is interpretative; it is the Balinese reading of Balinese ex-
perience, a story they tell themselves about themselves” (p. 448). In a similar way a
researcher of nonacademic writing can “read” in a manager’s striking out the formal
salutation “Dear Mr. Wittenburg:” and inserting by hand “Kent—” in a memo to a
subordinate a great deal about how the community of the workplace is socially orga-
nized and maintained. As Geertz says, “Small facts speak to large issues” (p. 23).
     The potential for qualitative research in nonacademic writing is great, but re-
searchers should heed the warnings of anthropologists. One of the most critical is the
insistence on a cross-cultural perspective. Some anthropologists question whether
valid ethnographies are possible by members of the same culture. These anthropolo-
gists argue that the experience of living in another culture makes the ethnographer
aware of how much a sense of belonging to a culture depends on shared knowledge
and beliefs. Although very few writing researchers will attempt ethnographies of the
kind done by anthropologists, the need for contrastive analysis still exists.
Researchers of nonacademic writing must continually reflect on their own perspec-
tive—on what they are likely to observe and not observe, and on how their own as-
sumptions about writing and the world affect how they interpret what they observe
(see Boon, 1982; Clifford, 1983).
     Researchers should also be aware of the history of writing systems. Contemporary
archaeologists have found that the development of writing systems grew out of eco-
nomic necessity. The purposes of writing for the first five hundred years apparently
were strictly commercial and administrative (Driver, 1948). Most surviving tablets
record the property and accounts of temples; religious, historical, and legal functions
for writing came later. Today we are in the midst of large-scale changes in the nature
and uses of writing systemms—changes brought about by electronic technology and
again stimulated by changing economic and social needs. Computerized information
services were first established to provide immediate access to financial news and other
economic information, but these data bases quickly spread to more general kinds of
information and even to hobbies. Electronic mail is as old as the telegraph, but with
the advent of computer and satellite technology it has become an increasingly perva-
sive communications system, extending rapidly beyond the workplace. The point
here is that writing technologies arise from perceived needs within communities. If
world trade were less complex, the need to develop electronic communication tech-
nologies would be proportionately less. Consequently, the changing nature of
nonacademic writing cannot be understood without examining changes in communi-
ties that produce nonacademic writing.
     Researchers who take the social perspective show us that writing in a complex so-
ciety is diverse and that our definitions of literacy must necessarily be pluralistic. They
show us that writing is an act not easily separated from its functions in a particular dis-
58   Chapter 2 #   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



          course community. They increase our awareness of the social importance of what we
          teach. In chapters that follow, Odell (chapter 7); Paradis, Dobrin, and Miller (chapter
          8); and Miller and Selzer (chapter 9) explore some of the complex relationships be-
           tween writing and the social, organizational, and professional contexts in which that
          writing is done.


          ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
           I am grateful for the responses of Phyllis Artiss, Charles Bazerman, Patricia Gambrell,
           Greg Myers, Martin Nystrand, Walter Reed, and Beverly Stoeltje to earlier drafts of
           this chapter.
           References
               Barthes, R. (1968). Elements of semiology. (A. Lavers & C. Smith, Trans.). New York:
                  Hill and Wang.
               Bazerman, C. (1979). Written language communities: Writing in the context of read-
                   ing. (ERIC Document ED 232 159.)
               Bazerman, C. (1983). Scientific writing as a social act: A review of the literature of
                  the sociology of science. In P. V. Anderson, R. J. Brockmann, & C. Miller (Eds.),
                  New essays in technical writing and communication: Research, theory and practice.
                  Farmingdale, NY: Baywood.
               Bizzell, P. (1982). Cognition, convention,      and certainty: What   we need to know
                   about writing. Pre/Text, 3, 213-243.
               Blom, J. P., & Gumperz, J. J. (1972). Social meaning in linguistic structures. In J. J.
                  Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions of sociolinguistics. New York: Holt,
                  Rinehart and Winston.
               Boon, J. A. (1982). Other tribes, other scribes. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                  Press.
               Clifford, J. (1983). On ethnographic authority. Representations, 1, 118-146.
               Conklin, H. C. (1968). Ethnography. In D. Sills (Ed.), International encyclopedia of the
                   social sciences. London: Macmillian.
               Driver, G. R. (1948). Semitic writing from pictograph to alphabet. London: Oxford
                   University Press.
               Emig, J. A. (1971). The composing processes of twelfth graders (NCTE Research Report
                  No. 13). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
               Faigley, L., & Miller, T. (1982). What we learn from writing on the job. College
                   English, 44, 557-569.
               Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against method: An outline of an anarchistic theory of knowledge.
                   Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
               Fish, S. (1980). Is there a text in this class?’ Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
               Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
               Geertz, C. (1983). Local knowledge: Further essays in interpretative anthropology. New
                  York: Basic Books.
               Gould, J. D. (1980). Experiments on composing letters: Some facts, some myths,
                  some observations. In L. W. Gregg & E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in
                   writing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
               Gumperz, J. J. (1971). Language in social groups. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
                                         Faigley = Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective    59


     Hagstrom, W. O. (1965). The scientific community. New York: Basic Books.
     Halpern, J., & Liggett, S. (1984). Computers and composing: How the new technologies
        are changing writing. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
     Hymes, D. (1972). Introduction: Toward ethnographies of communication. In P.
        Giglioli (Ed.), Language and social context. Baltimore: Penguin.
     Hymes, D. (1980). What is ethnography? In D. Hymes (Ed.), Language in education:
        Ethnolinguistic essays. Arlington, VA: Center for Applied Linguistics.
     Labov, W. (1966). The social stratification of English in New York City. Arlington, VA:
        Center for Applied Linguistics.
     Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city: Studies in the Black English Vernacular.
        Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
     Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The social construction of scientific
        facts. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.
     Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure. New York: Free Press.
     Nystrand, M. (1982). Rhetoric’s “audience” and linguistics’ “speech community”:
        Implications for understanding writing, reading, and text. In M. Nystrand (Ed.),
        What writers know: The language, process, and structure of written discourse. New
        York: Academic Press.
     Ohmann, R. (1976). English in America: A radical view of the profession. New York:
        Oxford University Press.
     Popper, K. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. New
        York: Harper & Row.
     Price, D. J. (1963). Little science, big science. New York: Columbia University Press.
     Selzer, J. (1983) What constitutes a “readable” technical style? In P. V. Anderson, R.
        J. Brockmann, & C. Miller (Eds.), New essays in technical writing and communica-
        tion: Research, theory, and practice. Farmingdale, NY: Baywood.
     Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Toulmin, S. (1972). Human understanding (Vol. 1). The collective evolution of scientific
        concepts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
     Volo8inov, V. N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language. (L. Matejka & I. R.
        Titunik, Trans.). New York: Seminar Press. (Original work published 1929)
     Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. (E. Hanfmann & G. Vakar, Trans.).
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (Original work published 1934)
     Willard, C. A. (1983). Argumentation and the social grounds of knowledge. University,
        AL: University of Alabama Press.
     Williams, R. (1981). Communications technologies and social institutions. In
        Contact: Human communication and its history. New York: Thames and Hudson.



DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. Explain the following: “The social perspective [of writing], then, moves beyond the tradi-
     tional rhetorical concern for audience, forcing researchers [and professional writers] to
     consider issues such as social roles, group purposes, communal organization, ideology,
     and finally theories of culture.” Refer to the readings in Chapter 1, or to knowledge you
 —~have of rhetoric from past course work, to support your explanation.
  2. Faigley argues that questions about the impact of social context on writing “could be
“— avoided as long as researchers studied student compositions, but they arise as soon as we
60   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?


               leave the academic setting with which we are familiar.” In fact, questions of social contexts’
                impacts on writing can be—and frequently are—ignored in the workplace. Referring to the
                scenarios with which Faigley opens, analyze how ignoring questions of social context
                might negatively affect you and your work if you were placed in the contexts of those writ-
                ers.
             3. Faigley argues that professional writers taking “the social perspective must have some
                way of defining and describing . . . society in terms broader than the traditional rhetorical
                conception of audience” and that “discourse community” has arisen as a more effective
                concept. Argue whether Faigley’s argument and the replacement of discourse communi-
                ty for audience renders rhetoric obsolete or inadequate for contemporary workplace writ-
                ing, or whether his argument extends and/or revises a rhetorical perspective of profes-
                sional writing.
             4. Assuming that a document in the workplace is ““a moment in the continuous process of
               ... communication,” explain what the professional writer needs to know and be able to
                do in order to participate effectively in this ongoing process.
             5. Write an exploratory essay, using the following as an introduction:
                 Under the “Research on Writing from the Social Perspective” and “Possibilities for Empirical
                 Research” sections, Faigley identifies numerous research issues/questions that are important
                 for fleshing out a better understanding of a social perspective on nonacademic writing. For
                 instance, Faigley suggests that writing researchers examine “what subjects are considered
                 appropriate in [particular] communities and how those subjects are determined.” Though
                 these issues/questions are significant and interesting for the purpose of research, they can
                 also be reformulated as suggested practices or rhetorical maxims for professional writers
                 adopting a social perspective. Rather than posing the previous example as a research ques-
                 tion, that is, it can be turned into a suggested practice: “professional writers should pay care-
                 ful attention to the subjects that are appropriate in particular communities and take time to
                 explore how the communities within which they are writing have determined what are
                  appropriate subjects.”
                      After reviewing the research issues/questions posed by Faigley in these two sections, |
                  have determined that the following three issues/questions can be reformulated as the most
                  significant suggestions/maxims for the professional writer driven by a social perspective: 1,
                  2, and 3. The essay that follows reformulates these issues/questions, argues why these are
                  the most significant to a social perspective on professional writing, and explains how the
                  suggested practices would affect the professional writer's work.



                      ene        ®                           eeeneroceesr     GSHOSHSHESARHAH
                                                                                      SHS eERABETeEE         DANE


              FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. practical (low sense)
              2. practical (high sense)
              3. theoretical knowledge
              4. practical knowledge
              5. productive knowledge
              6. techné
              7. poiesis
              8. praxis
              9. phronesis
                                                                     Miller     = What's Practical About Technical Writing?     61

                                        SOSERSSASHREHE         OEE    LEDS



  “Waar Ss
         ; PRACTICAL Azour
   TECHNICAL WRITING?
  ee           ee                              @      DSTORE         ROKR    SHORE   ROGEE   HERRERO   RERESRORESHO
                                                                                                                  ESS OEE
                                                                                                                    RSGE  HYS


     CAROLYN R MILLER

Gees and programs in technical writing are both praised and damned for being
     “practical.” Other writing courses are practical, to be sure: in general, practical
thetoric emphasizes that discourse is a means for pursuing a goal. Thus, freshman
composition aims to help students be more effective as students, technical writing
aims to help them be more effective as engineers or accountants or systems analysts,
and the writing instruction that accompanies many literature courses aims to help
them to be more effective as reader-critics. But since technical writing is singled out
for being practical, it is worth considering what makes it so.


THE MEANING OF “PRACTICAL”
 Most immediately, the practical seems to be concerned with getting things done,
 with efficient and effective action. Furthermore, efficiency and effectiveness seem
 more important for some types of action than for others; that is, some actions them-
 selves have practical aims (rather than aesthetic or ritual ones), actions concerned
with the material necessities of making a living or managing a household. One can
thus be practical (or impractical) about practical action. Being practical suggests a cer-
tain attitude or mode of learning, an efficiency (or goal directedness) that relies on
rules proved through use rather than on theory, history, experience, or general appre-
ciation. Practical rhetoric therefore seems to concern the instrumental aspect of dis-
course—its potential for getting things done—and at the same time to invite a how-
to, or handbook, method of instruction. Technical writing partakes of both these
dimensions of practical rhetoric.
      The rhetoric of the early Greeks also involved both dimensions. They empha-
sized that rhetoric was an art (or techne). This meant (to Aristotle, at least) that
rhetoric was conceptualized and teachable (not a knack, as Plato had feared) but nei-
ther certain nor absolute (not a science, as Plato had hoped). Greek rhetoric thus ini-
tiated both a handbook tradition of instruction and a counterposed theoretical appre-
ciation for the multiplicity of relations between means and ends.
     Richard Bernstein has suggested that there are both “low” and “high” senses of
“practical,” two senses that parallel the handbook and theoretical traditions of
rhetoric. It is the low sense, Bernstein says, that calls to mind “some mundane and
bread-and-butter activity or character. The practical man is one who is not con-
cerned with theory (even anti-theoretical or anti-intellectual), who knows how to
get along in the rough and tumble of the world” (x). The high sense, which derives
from the Aristotelian concept of praxis and underlies modern philosophical pragma-


Source: Reprinted by permission of the Modern Language Association of America from Carolyn Miller, “What's Practical About
Technical Writing?” Technical Writing: Theory and Practice. Ed. Bertie E. Fearing and W. Keats Sparrow, 1989, pp. 14-24.
Copyright © 1989 by the Modern Language Association of America.
62   Chapter 2 ® What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           tism, concerns human conduct in those activities that maintain the life of the com-
           munity. One of the many reasons for the discrepancy between these two senses of the
           practical highlights the dilemma of technical writing, which is usually called practi-
           cal in the low sense (by both its friends and its enemies, incidentally). This reason
           has to do with the social structure of the Greek city-state, which permitted the free
           citizen to be concerned with the good of the polis without being much concerned
           with bread-and-butter activities. The reason, of course, is the institution of slavery.
           Manual labor and most commercial activity were performed by noncitizens—slaves,
           foreigners, women. These activities were “preconditions” to the fulfillment of human
           potential in self-government, according to Nicholas Lobkowicz: “One would almost
           be tempted to say that the Greeks considered all ‘prepolitical’ activities prehuman
           and that only in the political life were they able to see a way of life which tran-
           scended the animal realm” (22). Technical writing, the rhetoric of “the world of
           work,” of commerce and production, is thus associated with what were low forms of
           practice from the beginning. In a world in which it is more dishonorable to own
           slaves than it is to work for a living, we might question whether this association
           should prevail.



           A CONCEPTUAL CONTRADICTION
           Before trying to suggest what it might mean to apply the higher sense of practical to
           technical writing, I want to indicate some difficulties in accepting the low sense un-
           critically, as many technical writing teachers have. These difficulties are revealed by a
           contradiction within the self-justifying discourse of technical writing pedagogy: the
           attempt to hold both that nonacademic rhetorical practices are inadequate (and
           therefore need improvement through instruction) and that they serve as authorita-
           tive models (and therefore define goals for instruction). We seem, that is, uncertain
           about where to locate norms, about whether the definition of “good writing” is to be
           derived from academic knowledge or from nonacademic practices. Most teachers will
           recognize the contradiction in the familiar dilemma of having to admit to students
           the discrepancy between practices that are supposed to be effective and those that are
           actually preferred and accepted.
                The first side of the contradiction is the familiar justification for teaching tech-
           nical writing. We teach it because when students graduate and begin writing on the
           job, they do not do very well. In the technical writing textbook I use, the first chap-
           ter, “Why Study Technical Communication?” documents the “inadequate commu-
           nication skills of many technical professionals” (Olsen and Huckin 7). For example,
           it quotes a survey about recently graduated civil engineers showing that writing and
           speaking are the areas of competence most important to civil-engineering practice
           but that about two-thirds of recent graduates are judged “inferior” in these areas; re-
           sults for mechanical and electrical engineers are similar. Complaints about technical
           writing from senior officials in science and industry include “foggy language,” fail-
           ures of emphasis and coherence, illogical reasoning, poor organization—a familiar
           litany. Most technical writing textbooks begin with the same rationale, that nonaca-
           demic rhetorical practices are wanting. The justification for academic instruction is
           that academics know something that can help improve professional practices.
                                                Miller   = What's Practical About Technical Writing?   63


     The second side of the contradiction derives from the research that interested
faculty members have begun to do on rhetorical practices in business, industry, and
science. This research is justified not only by the academic assumption that knowl-
edge is a good thing but also (and often primarily) by the belief that knowledge of
nonacademic practices is necessary to define goals for teaching practical rhetoric. As
Paul Anderson puts it, “We [educators] must first understand the profession, then de-
sign our curricula accordingly. Only if we understand intimately the job we intend to
prepare our students to perform can we create effective professional programs”
(“What Technical” 161).
    One of the favorite research projects is the survey, which can show what kinds of
work-related writing the population surveyed does, how important it seems to be,
what its common problems are, and what qualities and features are valued. In review-
ing selected surveys, Elizabeth Tebeaux notes discrepancies between instructional as-
sumptions and industrial practices and concludes that “several curricular changes are
clearly mandated” in order to “meet the communication needs of writers in industry”
(422). Anderson reviewed fifty surveys, because they can provide “teachers with im-
portant insights they can use as they design courses in business, technical and other
forms of career-related writing” (“What Survey” 4). Many surveys, such as those by
Marcus Green and Timothy Nolan and by Bill Coggin, have been proffered as au-
thoritative sources of information abut what a curriculum should accomplish for its
graduates. Ethnographic research has also been justified in instructional terms: ac-
cording to Stephen Doheny-Farina, for example, “By learning more about nonacade-
mic contexts for writing, we are learning more about the kinds of rhetorical demands
faced by many of our college graduates,” and this knowledge “can inform the teaching
of writing” (159).
    Major national grants have gone to researchers engaged in work justified in these
same ways, a Clue to the institutionalization of this line of reasoning, as well as to its
extension   from     technical   writing   to   composition     in general.   The   Fund   for
Improvement of Post-Secondary Education (FIPSE) sponsored a project on writing-
program evaluation at the University of Texas; the project produced a report saying
that “before any college writing program can be judged effective or ineffective, we
must know first if what it teaches has value to its graduates in later life. Like any edu-
cational program, the overall effectiveness of writing programs must be judged ac-
cording to the needs of the population they serve” (Faigley et al. 1-2). Another
FIPSE grant went to Wayne State for a university-industry collaborative effort on re-
search and curriculum development in professional writing. The researchers present
cooperation between academics and practitioners as the way to “ensure that students
are prepared for the diverse communication tasks outside the university” (Couture et
al. 392-93). FIPSE has also sponsored research on collaborate writing in the work-
place by Lisa Ede and Andrea Lunsford, who cite as a major problem “the dichotomy
between current models and methods of teaching writing . . . and the actual writing
situations students will face upon graduation”; this dichotomy results, in part, from
“our lack of detailed understanding about on-the-job writing” (“Research” 69). The
National Institute of Education earlier sponsored work by Lee Odell and Dixie
Goswami on writing in nonacademic settings; their study also suggests that our ability
to teach writing will be “enhanced” by more complete understanding of how people
come to write successfully on the job (“Writing” 257).
64   Chapter 2 *   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



          PRACTICE AS DESCRIPTIVE OR PRESCRIPTIVE
          In its eagerness to be useful—to students and their future employers—technical writ-
          ing has sought a basis in practice, a basis that is problematic. I do not mean to suggest
          that academics should keep themselves ignorant of nonacademic practices; indeed,
          much of the research I cited above has been extremely illuminating. But technical
          writing teachers and curriculum planners should take seriously the problem of how to
          think about practice. The problem leads one to the complex relation between de-
          scription and prescription. Odell warns against mistaking one for the other: “we must
          be careful not to confuse what is with what ought to be ... We have scarcely begun to
          understand how organizational context relates to writing, and we have almost no in-
          formation about which aspects of that relationship are helpful to writers and which
           are harmful” (278). Anderson also warns us about this mistake: in presenting a model
           of the technical writing profession for use in designating curricula, he cautions that
           the model “represents an ideal. It is built around the best practices of the profession,
           not around common practice—or malpractice” (“What Technical” 165). He gives as
           examples usability testing (not common but good) and readability formulas (common
           but bad). Neither Odell nor Anderson, however, gives us much help in understand-
           ing what is helpful and what is harmful, what is good practice and what is malprac-
           tice. Even David Dobrin’s discussion of the contradictions involved in teaching to
           the standards of employers, although it recommends both curricular and corporate re-
           form, relies finally on accepting practices of the workplace on their own terms; teach-
           ers should “make people at work better able to deal with others” (“What’s the
           Purpose” 159).
                At this point, it is worth recalling an earlier (unfounded) study of writing in
           nonacademic settings, “Writing, Out in the World,” a chapter of Richard Ohmann’s
           English in America. Ohmann avoids the contradiction of taking practice as both im-
           perfect and authoritative by positing a wider perspective from which to make such
           judgments; he requires, as Odell and Anderson and Dobrin do not, a basis for evalu-
           ating a practice other than that of the practice itself. The nonacademic writing
           Ohmann examined is that of futurists and forecasters, of foreign-policy analysts, and
           of the government officials who wrote the memorandums we call “The Pentagon
           Papers.” Ohmann sought to establish, not that academic writing is different from
           writing in the workplace, but that they are dangerously similar; he concludes that
           academic instruction in writing “has helped, willy nilly, to teach the rhetoric of the
           bureaucrats and technicians” (205). He claims that the

               writing of the powerful and influential shares some characteristics with the required writ-
               ing of their college-age sons and daughters; that these characteristics are fairly important
               to the style of thinking and planning that guides the most powerful country in the world;
               and that this style has some systematically dangerous features when it operates not in the
               classroom but on the stages of history. (173)

                 A similar and more direct charge has been made recently by Susan Wells, who
           claims that “the ideology of technical writing explicitly assents to its instrumental
           subordination to capital; the aim of the discipline as a whole is to become a more re-
           sponsive tool” (247). Being useful is not necessarily good, according to these Marxist
           critics, but little in the discourse of technical writing allows for this conclusion or ex-
                                              Miller   = What's Practical About Technical Writing?   65


plores its consequences. Because the Marxist critique features practical activity as a
central concept, it raises questions that are particularly germane to technical writing,
questions about whose interests a practice serves and how we decide whose interests
should be served.


PRACTICE AND HIGHER EDUCATION
The uneasy relation between nonacademic practice and academic instruction has
been part of academic discussions about technical writing from their beginnings in
the late nineteenth century, as Robert Connor’s historical work has shown. Connors
documents recurrent debates over whether practical or humanistic goals should pre-
vail in technical writing courses (or, as they were commonly called, “engineering
English”), whether, that is, such study should prepare technical students for work or
for leisure. Moreover, these debates reflect a larger debate in American higher edu-
cation, about the appropriate relation between vocational preparation and cultural
awareness. In mid-nineteenth century, this debate transformed the American col-
lege curriculum, according to the educational historian Frederick Rudolph, who
points specifically to the Morrill Act of 1862 and the founding of Cornell in 1866.
The first president of Cornell, Andrew White, “confronted all the choices that had
been troubling college authorities: practical or classical studies, old professions or
new vocations, pure or applied science, training for culture and character or for jobs”
(117). White opted for pluralism, for providing many courses of study in preparation
for many kinds of lives: “the Cornell curriculum ... multiplied truth into truths, a
limited few professions into an endless number of new self-respecting ways of mov-
ing into the middle class” (119). In a similar vein, Laurence Veysey’s study of the
emergence of the American university in the nineteenth century traces the develop-
ment of “utility” as a basis for education. During this period, according to Veysey,
“America was a scene of vocational ambition,” both in terms of individual aspira-
tions and in terms of the desire for public service. At the same time, the notion of
public service broadened to include practical and technical occupations, not just the
gentlemanly occupations for which earlier education had been preparatory.
“Vocational training,” says Versey, “directly affected the undergraduate curriculum
of the new university” (66).
     Other commentators have emphasized that the relation between instruction and
practice is part of a more general condition, the subsistence of higher education in a
socioeconomic matrix. Clark Kerr, in The Uses of the University, says that “the life of
the universities for a thousand years has been tied into the recognized professions in
the surrounding society, and the universities will continue to respond as new profes-
sions arise” (111). (This view, of course, implies that the classical curriculum served
as preparation not for leisure but for the upper-class vocations of law, politics, and the
ministry. )jee Kenneth Galbraith has noted that “itisthe vanity ofeducators that
         ape   the educational syste n to their preferred image. They may not be without
influence, butthe decisive force is the economic system” (236). More specifically, in
his critique of nonacademic writing, Ohmann comments that
    the constraints upon English from the rest of the university and ee from outside it
    are strong. . . .[T]he writers of the textbooks and the planners of courses ... can hardly
66   Chapter 2 =   What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



               ignore what passes for intellectual currency in that part of the world where vital deci-
               sions are made or what kind of composition succeeds in the terms of that part of the
               world. (206)

               Current enthusiasm for “industry-university collaboration” in applied research
          and development is perhaps the most recent manifestation of this general and neces-
          sary relation. But there is also a repertoire of accepted mechanisms for channeling the
          relation—internships, advisory councils, certification of graduates, and procedures for
          justifying and accrediting programs. These mechanisms are used in educational pro-
          grams for the established professions, like law, medicine, engineering, and teaching, as
          well as in several areas of practical rhetoric with relatively long curricular histories,
          like journalism and public relations. For the most part, the channels these mechanisms
          create are one-way: influence flows primarily from nonacademic practices to the acad-
          emy. The gradient is reflected in the language at the industry-university interface,
           which includes, on the one hand, “demand,” “need,” “value” and, on the other, “re-
           sponse,” “service,” “utility.” My own university, a land-grant institution, provides a
           case in point. Its “Mission Statement” declares that the university “has responsibility
           for the academic, research, and public service programs in areas of primary importance
           to the State’s economy.” University policies concerning proposals for new degree pro-
           grams require statements concerning the proposed program’s relation to the institu-
           tional mission, to student demand, and to “manpower” needs in the state.
                Teachers of technical writing have advocated applying the mechanisms of
           nonacademic influence to their new programs, using the same kinds of language.
           Internship programs should be adopted in technical communication programs, ac-
           cording to a recent review of literature, because they encourage students to relate
           their study of theory to practice, permit faculty members to “keep in touch with” cur-
           rent practices, and enable employers “to influence college programs” (Gloe 18-19).
           Advisory councils are advocated because they “integrate the endeavors of the two
           worlds [academic and business-industrial] directly and in a[n] .. . effective manner”
           (Brockmann 137). (Certification has been discussed within the Society for Technical
           Communication, but there is insufficient consensus in the profession to arrive at
           standards [“Certification” 6]; accreditation is now being investigated by the society
           [Strategic Plan].)
                Such language echoes the discourse of other professional programs, programs that
           have provided precedents for technical communication.

               Library Science
               It is widely believed and reported that a chasm of mutual ignorance and indiffer-
               ence separates librarians and library educators from one another. . . . All sectors
               of practice regularly and strongly express a desire for more influence over the
               content and character of professional education. (Clough and Galvin 2)

               Public relations
               Practitioners and educators must act in concert to guide public relations in the
               direction of professionalism. (Commission on Graduate Studies in Public Rela-
               tions 5)
                                             Miller   * What's Practical About Technical Writing   67


    Information science
    Lack of communication between the employers of information professionals and
    the institutions that educate and train them is one reason that educational insti-
    tutions are not meeting needs and demands of the changing environment and
    new technologies. (Griffiths, abstract)
    Business
    MBA curricula must be reevaluated and, perhaps, restructured if they are to meet
    business expectations, and—from the point of view of business—if they are to
    better prepare students for the real world in which they will build their careers.
    (Jenkins and Reizenstein 24)
    Journalism
    What training and preparation do radio and television journalists consider im-
    portant for a career in their field? Answers . . . should contain valuable insights
    for the broadcast journalism educator. (Fisher 140)
    Training and Development
    Training activities involve a wide variety of skills, abilities, knowledge, and infor-
    mation.... An interdisciplinary approach to T&D preparation is important,
    given the range of competencies required. (Reed 11)
     This discourse is infected by the assumptions that what is common practice is
useful and what is useful is good. The good that is sought is the good of an existing in-
dustry or profession, with existing structures and functions. For the most part, these
are tied to private interests, and to the extent that educational programs are based on
existing nonacademic practices, they perpetuate and strengthen those private inter-
ests—they do indeed make their faculties and their students “more responsive tools.”
As the minutes of one meeting of the advisory council to the School of Engineering
at my university indicate, regular contact between the university and industry “makes
students more valuable to industry.”


PRAXIS AND TECHNE
My discussion so far has relied on a set of related oppositions that pervade the dis-
course of higher education:
                                    theory versus practice
                                   academy versus industry
                               ivory tower versus marketplace
                           idle speculation versus vocationalism
                                    inquiry versus action
                        gentleman-scholar versus technician-dupe
                             contemplation versus application
                                 general versus particular
                            knowing-that versus knowing-how
                                   science versus knack
68   Chapter 2   = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           In this form the oppositions are probably unresolvable, and the best we can hope for
           is Anderson’s notion that they should form a “creative tension” (Introd. 6).
                 Another approach is to suspect the worst: that a dichotomy so widespread must be
           (at least partly) false. And in fact, Aristotle’s characterization of rhetoric as an art,
           rather than a science or a knack, cuts through these oppositions with a middle term—
           techne. As he defines it in the Nicomachean Ethics, “a productive state that is truly rea-
           soned” (VI, iv), techne requires both particular and general knowledge, both know-
           ing-how and knowing-that; techne is both applicable and conceptualized. Donald
           Schon’s recent critique of professional education relies on the same middle term: it is
           “art,” he says, that professionals display in practice, and it is art that unifies theory and
           application in a process he calls “reflection-in-action.” Aristotle’s techne rhetorike, or
           treatise or rhetorical art, joins theory and practice by deriving knowing how from
           knowing that, prescription from description. Although positivist philosophy claims
           that this derivation is fallacious (“you can’t get ‘ought’ from ‘is’”), one of the major in-
           sights of Marx, according to Bernstein, is to deny the positivist fallacy. Marx (as well as
           Aristotle) is able to derive from description of existing social practices the shape of hu-
           man need and potential—which provide the basis for prescription.
                 But to understand Aristotle’s Rhetoric only as a techne is to miss what Aristotle
           himself has to say about practice. Understood as techne, Aristotle’s treatise would fall
           within the handbook tradition, as a set of instructions that helps one produce texts.
           Such a treatise would concern productive knowledge, or episteme poietike, one of
           three kinds of knowledge in Aristotle’s system: theoretical (concerned with knowing
           for its own sake), practical (concerned with doing), and productive (concerned with
           making). According to George Kennedy, Aristotle does not make the connection be-
           tween rhetoric and productive knowledge (as he does for poetics) but treats rhetoric
           as theoretical knowledge concerned with “discovering” the available means of per-
           suasion (63).
                The remaining alternative—that Aristotelian rhetoric is practical, rather than
           theoretical or productive—has been argued by Richard McKeon, and its implications
           have been explored by Eugene Garver. To see rhetoric as practical, in Aristotle’s sys-
           tem, is to emphasize action over knowledge or production; rhetoric becomes a form of
           conduct, like the related practical realms of ethics and politics, which are constant
           background presences in the Rhetoric. Aristotle distinguishes carefully in the
           Nicomachean Ethics between production and practice, poiesis and praxis: as distinct
           from “science,” or theoretical knowledge, both concern the variable, or that which
           can be other than it is; but they differ in that production “aims at an end other than
           itself,” the product, and practice aims at its own performance, at “doing well.” The
           reasoning appropriate to production takes the form of techne, art or technique, and
           the reasoning appropriate to performance, or conduct, takes the form of phronesis,
           prudence; for Aristotle there can be no art, or technical knowledge, of conduct.
           Prudence is the reasoning that makes one “capable of action in the sphere of human
           goods” (NE 6: v). Like techne, prudential reasoning is situated to undermine the op-
           positions that plague discussions of professional education, for it necessarily concerns
           both universals and particulars: it applies knowledge of human goods to particular cir-
           cumstances (NE 6: vii; Garver 645). Unlike techne, however, which is concerned
                                             Miller « What's Practical About Technical Writing   69


with the useful (that is, with the quality of a product given a set of expectations for
it), prudence is concerned with the good (that is, with the quality of the expectations
themselves).
      Aristotle’s conceptof praxis has also informed some recent thinking about hu-
man action. As the central concept in Marx, praxis highlights the way in which the
human person “is the result of his [or her] own work” (Bernstein 39; see also
Lobkowicz 418-20). Human belief structures and social relations are understood to
be used in practical relations between human beings and objects. Sch6n’s account of
professional practice emphasizes the “knowing inherent in intelligent action” (50).
Moreover, practices, as Alasdair MacIntyre has insisted, create not only knowledge
but their own goods, and because practices are necessarily social, these goods require
“subordinating ourselves within the practice in our relationship to other practition-
ers” (191). The insights for the academic are that practice creates both knowledge
and value and that the value created comprehends the good of the community in
which the practice has a history.
     Understanding practical rhetoric as a matter of conduct rather than of produc-
tion, as a matter of arguing in a prudent way toward the good of the community
rather than of constructing texts, should provide some new perspectives for teachers
of technical writing and developers of courses and programs in technical communica-
tion. For example, it provides a reasonable basis for the necessary combination of aca-
demic and nonacademic contributions to curriculum. If praxis creates knowledge,
academics should indeed know about nonacademic practices. But the academy does
not have to be just a receptacle for practices and knowledge created elsewhere. The
academy itself is also a set of practices, including those of observation, conceptualiza-
tion, and instruction—practices that create their own kind of knowledge. Such
knowledge allows the academy to provide a standpoint for inquiry into and criticism
of nonacademic practices. We ought not, in other words, simply design our courses
and curricula to replicate existing practices, taking them for granted and seeking to
make them more efficient on their own terms, making our students “more valuable to
industry”; we ought instead to question those practices and encourage our students to
do so too. Wells’s “pedagogy for technical writing” suggests that we should aim “to
work within the structures of technical discourse so that students can negotiate their
demands but also be aware of the limited but real possibility of moving beyond them”
(264). My own earlier sketch of a new pedagogy similarly suggested the need to pro-
mote both competence and critical awareness of the implications of competence
(“Humanistic” 617). I might now supplement critical awareness with prudential judg-
ment, the ability (and willingness) to take socially responsible action, including sym-
bolic action.
     An understanding of practical rhetoric as conduct provides what a techne cannot:
a locus for questioning, for criticism, for distinguishing good practice from bad. That
locus is not the individual or any particular set of private interests but the human com-
munity that is created through conduct; this community is the basis for practice in
Bernstein’s “high” sense. While the good that praxis in this higher sense creates may
include the interests of individuals and industry, it is larger and more complex; the rel-
evant community is not the working group or the corporation but the larger commu-
70   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           nity within which the corporation sells its products, pays taxes, hires employees, lob-
           bies, issues stock, files lawsuits, and is itself held accountable to the law.
                Through praxis we make ourselves and each other in interaction: Aristotle em-
           phasizes the political dimension of this interaction, Marx the economic. But whether
           our everyday activities are primarily those of governing a community or those of mak-
           ing a living, they have both political and economic dimensions. If technical writing
           is the rhetoric of “the world of work,” it is the rhetoric of contemporary praxis. In
           teaching such rhetoric, then, we acquire a measure of responsibility for political and
           economic conduct.


           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Summarize what is sometimes referred to as the “the is vs. the ought” controversy, or
                nonacademic professional writing practice vs. academic instruction. Identify where you
                stand on the controversy. In your response, examine the strengths and weaknesses of
                both sides.
             2. Summarize the distinctions between rhetoric/writing as a productive vs. a practical art. In
                your summary, refer to the aims of each and the kinds of knowledge required of each.
                Also, compare and contrast how each perspective would affect the professional
               rhetor’s/writer’s work.
             3. If we assume that professional writing should be understood as “a matter of conduct
                rather than of production, as a matter of arguing in a prudent way toward the good of the
                community rather than of constructing texts,” explain what you believe professional writ-
                ers would do at work. Refer to the following scenario to contextualize your explanation:
                  You work as the communications officer for a regional environmental watchdog organization
                  in Northern Michigan. You are the only full-time writer on the payroll, though you have one
                  part-time staff writer and an intern from a nearby university. The organization also has a di-
                  rector, a financial officer, two full-time environmental scientists, and a host of volunteers.
                      In the past three years, sport fishers in the region—a major tourist industry that is the pet
                  of a state senator—have noticed a significant decrease in the size and population of various
                  fish species. Your staff scientists’ field tests have identified increased water pollutants that
                  could be traced to several different industries upstream, but their resources and data make it
                  hard to confirm any source.
                      The organization for which you work decides that they need to initiate a communications
                  campaign to address the problem. You begin your work by...


                CARPARK   DADO   RRHHRHE   RES   @oeeerveneon   “O48   CREECH   TKHHAHREHOHHT
                                                                                          HERO   RAH   EROHO   ERE   SER
                                                                                                                      ae aHaees


              FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. invention
              2. knowledge (as a verb)
              3. rhetoric of persuasion
              4. rhetoric of interaction
                                       Regli     = Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise in Inventio                     71

                                                                                                               SeeHagee



        WHOSE IDEAS? THE TECHNICAL                                                      WRITER’S
        EXPERTISE IN INVENTIO
   ee         *                                  PORFHSHSS PLSEHRHAR
                                                             LAHAT THREOHTE TRESS SAH
                                                                              AFASSI                           SEERHRBES eeeee


  SUSAN HARKNESS REGLI
        Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania


ABSTRACT
         Compelling arguments from ccs                       studying the thetoric of science have convinced




                          hat, then, is the expertise that the technical writer contributes to the in-
         vention process? Working from the notion that knowledge is an activity rather than a
         commodity [1], I argue that
                                                                                        This focus ex-
         pands our understanding of how invention works when the goal of communication is pro-
         ducing knowledge across disciplinary boundaries, rather than winning an argument with
         persuasive techniques.!

In an article titled “Ciceronian Rhetoric and the Rise of Science: Plain Style
Reconsidered,” Michael Halloran and Merrill Whitburn discuss the need for students
to be equipped with a broad range of rhetorical devices. They lament that in many
technical writing textbooks, “Students are expected to muddle through by stylistic
instinct, an approach that reinforces the myth of the born writer” [2, p. 68]. In this
article, I will argue that if                                                              chi         :


knows how
tion. More specifically, I will suggest that to articulate those rich techniques, rhetori-
cians must recognize and examine the expertise they have in interdisciplinary collab-
oration, a realm where the eristic techniques of the law court simply will not suffice
to effectively facilitate communication.
     An excerpt from a review of changes brought about by the high-tech workplace,
written by Elizabeth Tebeaux, highlights where the emphasis often lies in discussions
of technical writing in the “Information Age”:




Source: Regli, Susan Harkness. "Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise in /nventio." Journal of Technical Writing and
Communication, Volume 29, Number 1, pp. 31-40. Baywood Publishing Company, Inc., shih NY (1999). Reprinted
with permission.
1 A previous version of this article was presented at the 1998 Conference on College Composition and
Communication, April 1-4, Chicago, Illinois.
72   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?


               Communication skills will be redefined as the ability to handle vast amounts of informa-
               tion and to adapt it for a wide range of users: the foremost problem that will confront em-
               ployees in the information society emanates from the quantity of information being con-
               tinuously generated...the central question becomes how to handle it—access it,
               manage it, use it, and help others use it [3, p. 138].


                In considering the task of invention in technical writing, the critical question I
           find myself wanting to ask about this statement is ‘                                  -
                            ’ Later in the piece, Tebeaux recognizes cha
           to technical writing curricula based on the growing need to interact with profession-
           als with varied academic backgrounds, to study audiences, and to communicate with
           other cultures. In each of these instances, however, the focus remains on managing,
           analyzing, and presenting data that seems to have been generated elsewhere. In one
           paragraph, the need for “group problem solving” skills is acknowledged, as Tebeaux
           recommends that classrooms incorporate laboratory settings where ao                 di-
           verse backgrounds can “practice network problem solving” [3, p. 142].


                 Even when invention in scientific and technical discourse is discussed specifi-
           cally, the role of the technical writer in the process is unclear. In an important biblio-
           graphic article, Carolyn Miller discusses works that take seriously the idea that scien-
           tific writing involves discovery of the available means of argument and therefore
           scientific writing involves invention [4]. The majority of the article discusses the in-
           vention process in science and technology. The discussion of the technical writer's
           contribution to this process is limited to a final section of the article that mentions
           those few technical writing and pedagogical resources that do include some treat-
           ment of invention. The works discussed, however, primarily seem to address either
           invention based on scientific expertise or invention in generic writing processes, but
           not a cross-section of the two areas of expertise. A short article by J. W. Allen, Jr.
           (“Introducing Invention to Technical Students”) is the only work Miller mentions
           that ascribes the difficulties in discussing invention within technical writing classes
              “the problem of distinguishing technical and scientific inquiry from rhetorical in-
           vention.” Other than in Allen’s article, it seems that the question of how the infor-
           mation that the technical writer will manage is originally produced is not addressed.
               Which highlights the central difficulty that I wish to address in this article. Since
           we value technical writing as a legitimate academic discipline and profession, weobvi-




                                            . If we believe the technical writer is a professional rhetor
           and not simply a document technician, we have to ask ourselves          wk
                              Regli    = Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise inInventio           73


DO WE “KNOW” OR DO WE “KNOWLEDGE”?
One way to begin thinking about this question is to examine what we mean when we
say that a writer works with generated information or someone else’s knowledge to
produce a document. Viewpoints from two scholars have expanded my own thinking
about this question.
    First, John Gage has proposed a way of understanding knowledge as an activity in
which people can be engaged, rather than as a static entity that can be passed from
one person to another:




               a; 207].

This concept is difficult to fully comprehend because it runs counter to our usual ways
of thinking about knowledge transmission and the communication process; knowl-
edge has typically been a noun, not a verb. But      thi

                                                          . Take, for example, the role of a tech-
oy writer in a software engineering environment.                          ee
                 715 la        —   piatit leahaasslE   ADA AA 2 ALG SSS meer creates
                                                                                 ;     a         |   arnt
                                                                                                       e
                                                           PLC   dl   W   CT,   WILO       Ore

                                                e software. |




    Writing more recently, Ronald Schleifer discusses the limitations of models of
thinking and reading that “create the impression that these isolated activities are
natural, individual, and context-free” [5, p. 440]. As an alternative, he looks to the
collaborative work of scientists as described by Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar in
Laboratory Life. Exchanges among scientists are broken up by Latour and Woolgar
into four categories: empirical facts, practical procedures, theory (possibilities of
knowledge), and gossip. But Schleifer notes that:
    What is striking about the categories... is the ways in which the “subjects” of these
    knowledges constantly shift... The roles of master and apprentice are repeatedly trans-
    formed. This is precisely what the Cartesian model of the subject thinking—focused
    solely on “the reformation of my own opinions” but not on the position of the thinker—
  - cannot accommodate; it is what the model of the isolated reader of a novel . . . does not
    allow [5, pp. 447-448].

Schleifer is advocating, in the scientific context of interdisciplinary collaboration,
74   Chapter 2 » What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



                            [5, p. 439]. Meaning making arises out of-repeated exchanges at par-
           ticular times among members of a group who are at once both isolated and undeni-
           ably communal.
                The ideas articulated by Gage and Schleifer, although arising out of different the-
           oretical and practical considerations, articulate a very different view of meaning mak-
           ing than that which would underlie the notion that technical writers simply obtain
           information and data from unnamed sources and package itto create communication
           between the makers ofa product and the:users.                                      oe




                            ate ¢         n. In order for “his aepercise in communication to
           be arrienlated and Ravante However technical writers—and thetoricians | in gen-
           eral—need to                                                                   to
           s


           MODERN RHETORICAL EXPERTISE:
           PERSUASION ... OR COLLABORATION?
           In “Writing in the Content Areas: Some Theoretical Complexities,” David Kaufer
           and Richard Young narrate a story that makes very real the areas of difficulty that
           scholars can encounter when working across disciplinary boundaries. The article ad-
           dresses the problems that arose when two rhetoricians began working with a biologist
           to incorporate writing into a biology curriculum, ultimately to help students learn how
           to write as professional biologists. The participants in the pilot project found repeat-
           edly that neither set of experts could succeed in the project by calling solely on their
           own expertise: “Velez and Young [

                                                                                                > they
                                                                                         ” (6, p. 89].
             he interaction that ensued “produced changes on                6, p. 101], and the ef-
           fort necessary to engage in and explore this interaction seems to be a large part of the
           prohibitive “commitment of time and dollars” that made the pilot project ill-suited as
           a university-wide model without further research and refinement [6, p. 88].
                The critical problem that makes the interaction between rhetoricians and the biol-
           ogists take so much time and call on so many resources seems to be that waste
                                                                                    ecent re-
           search on minions in industry 7 ——                       = certainly increased our under-
           standing of collaborative situations [e.g., 7, 8], but
                                                                                    . As rhetoricians,
           we inherit a tradition that knows a great deal about how to persuade an audience, about
           how to win an argument, and about how to perform in a competitive situation like a
           law court where one party will be the winner and the other will lose. By contrast, we
           know much less about how to exchange knowledge profitably, about how to clarify dif-
                           Regli = Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise inInventio   75


ferences of definition and associations while recognizing ambiguities, and about how to
identify and solve problems while incorporating many varied perspectives. We know a


     One way to understand what we don’t know is by looking at the writing process
of an individual versus the writing process of a group. Kaufer and Young mention the
interaction between problem spaces that Bereiter and Scardamalia identified in the
workings of individuals as they write: “Our contention is that this interaction be-
tween the two problem spaces [content space and Weoue space] constitutes ue
essence of reflection in writing” [9, p. 302].




useful to us; some of the skills and theory will have to be created out of our experi-
ence and our ingenuity. The important guideline to recognize, however, is that while
persuasion is operative in any communication situation, it is not the foremost goal of
the productive collaborative situation. Douglas Ehninger called the rhetoric of the
current period (from the 1930s to the present) a “sociological” rhetoric: he observed
that while there are many specialized strands of interest in rhetorical studies, at bot-
tom they all “view rhetoric as an instrument for understanding and improving human
relations” [10, p. 333]. What this may mean in practice is that the law court is no
longer the paradigm case for rhetorical studies; instead, the collaborative, often ad-
hoc group working together to make improvements is the situation toward which we
need to direct our attention.


A PRELIMINARY PLAN
In this section, I will attempt to sketch what we already know about the expertise a
rhetorician can bring to a collaborative situation, and what we might need to add or
elaborate to create a plan for the action of a technical writer or the curriculum of a
technical writing program. | will continue to use the model of the technical writer on
a software development team to focus the description of this plan.

Strategies for Collaborative Problem Identification and Inquiry



        would coroner training in tagmemic eee solving strategies to fad
76   Chapter 2 « What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?


           off hasty conclusions and to aid the team in identifying exactly which needs the
           software is being designed to fulfill. In addition, these strategies could be extended
           to be used :as ag       problem ovine heuristic:




           Situation Analysis




                                                     I                               aadQ


                                                   ied [11, pp. 6-8]. While Bitzer did not oneal
           intend   for  his notion of the rhetorical situation to be implemented as an analytical
           heuristic, I believe that it could be profitably used to find places of misunderstanding,
           and especially to allow each member of the team to articulate the constraints under
           which they believe they are operating. The lack of knowledge about one another’s
           constraints is often one of the richest sources of miscommunication in a collaborative
           situation; having each member articulate his or her view of the rhetorical situation
           could alleviate some of this confusion before the development process proceeds down
           dead-end paths.

           Audience Analysis

           As part of the analysis of situation, and also i
           sumer) for the producti
           change     information, the technical writer should be equippe

                                        e have made great strides in encouraging technical writ-
           ers to speak to the audience directly to find out what their needs and expectations
           are, to uncover the processes they use to do their work, and sometimes to redesign
           these processes so that poor procedures are not simply re-instantiated in the software
           program.                                                      iscipli




           Analysis of the Structure of Information
           Often, in the process of deciphering information from other fields of expertise (espe-
           cially if the expert is not available for direct consultation), a technical writer will
           need to figure out the meaning of unfamiliar words or concepts. A deep understand-
           ing of how information is typically structured according to the principles of grammar,
           usage, and genre conventions is often useful in verifying the sense of sentences when
           the vocabulary words or underlying concepts are from unfamiliar domains. In addi-
           tion, for those writing tasks where the “knowledge” has indeed been supplied by an
                           Regli   = Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise in Inventio   77


existing database or set of printed manuals, an understanding of the structure of infor-
mation is crucial to organizing large bodies of data for presentation to audiences. This
task is particularly important in new online environments where the amount of avail-
able data is virtually unlimited and presentation is constrained only by how much an
audience can absorb.

Production Skills
At some point in the process, documentation does need to be produced, including
both verbal and graphic representations of knowledge. Current traditional rhetoric’s
emphasis on production and some handbooks of technical writing tend to deal solely
with this aspect of the technical writer’s job. But in the new paradigm, the technical
writer may not be the sole person generating and revising the documentation. Drafts
typically need to be passed from one member of the team to another so that changes
can be suggested, questions can be asked, and revisions can be incorporated with the
agreement of all members of the team (and each person will often focus on a different
set of primary concerns for the documentation). This process of collaborative revi-
sion is an area in which more research and development is needed, both in terms of
process and tools to support the interaction.


EXTENDING THE FIELD
Merrill Whitburn argued convincingly that the field of technical writing needs
the expertise found in English departments, and that English departments need
the focus of practical concerns (and marketability) that technical writing can offer
[12]. I have tried in this article to extend his argument for the value of the field
and I would claim that by looking at the constraints and possibilities available to a
professional who specializes in technical writing, we can better understand where
our expertise as modern rhetors lies, and where we ought to direct our inquiry to
increase it. The plan I have outlined is an attempt to understand this expertise by
examining the environment in which a technical writer operates. Unintentionally,
it is also a fair articulation of what anyone receiving training in rhetoric ought to
encounter at some point in his or her education. The reason for this parallel is
that in the field of rhetoric as a whole, I believe we need to turn our attention
away from simply aiming at persuasion, and from simply addressing discipline-
specific academic environments. Inquiry as we know it is becoming increasingly
multidisciplinary, collaborative, multisector (as industry, academia, and govern-
ment work together more frequently), and interactive. The more we can come to
understand our expertise in this relatively new environment, the better we are po-
sitioned as effective professionals. Examination of the field of technical writing—
specifically of the role of invention in that field—can help us to increase this un-
derstanding.
References
     fc J. T. Gage, An Adequate Epistemology for Composition: Classical and Modern
        Perspectives, in Landmark Essays on Rhetorical, R. Young and Y. Liu (eds.),
        Hermagoras Press, California, pp. 203-219, 1994.
78   Chapter 2 =» What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



                Z S. M. Halloran and M. D. Whitburn, Ciceronian, Rhetoric and the Rise of
                  Science: The Plain Style Reconsidered, in The Rhetorical Tradition and Modern
                  Writing, J. J. Murphy (ed.), The Modern Language Association of America, New
                  York, pp. 58-72, 1982.
                  E. Tebeaux,       The   High-Tech   Workplace:   Implications   for Technical
                   Communication         Instruction,   in Technical Writing:   Theory and Practice,      B. E.
                   Fearing and W. K. Sparrow (eds.), The              Modern     Language     Association      of
                   America, New York, pp. 136-144, 1989.
                   C. Miller, Invention in Technical and Scientific Discourse: A Prospective
                   Survey, in Research in Technical Communication, M. Moran and D. Journet (eds.),
                   Greenwood Press, Connecticut, pp. 117-162, 1985.
                   R. Schleifer, Disciplinary and Collaboration         in the Sciences and Humanities,
                   College English, 59, pp. 438-452, 1997.
                   D. Kaufer and R. Young, Writing in the Content Areas: Some Theoretical
                   Complexities, in Theory and Practice in the Teaching of Writing: Rethinking the
                    Discipline, L. Odell (ed.), Southern         Illinois   University   Press,   Carbondale,
                    Illinois, pp. 71-103, 1993.
                   M. B. Debs, Recent Research on Collaborative Writing in Industry, Technical
                   Communication, 38, pp. 476-484, 1991.
                   L. Jorn, A Selected Annotated Bibliography on Collaboration in Technical
                   Writing, Technical Communication Quarterly, 2:1, pp. 105-115, 1993.
                   C. Bereiter and M. Scardamalia, The Psychology of Written Composition,
                    Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1987.
                    D. Ehninger,    On     Systems of Rhetoric,      in Professing the New        Rhetorics:   A
                    Sourcebook,   T. Enos and S. C. Brown        (eds.), Prentice Hall, Englewood        Cliffs,
                     New Jersey, pp. 327-339, 1994.
               A bss L.F. Bitzer, The Rhetorical Situation, Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1, pp. 1-14, 1968.
               We M. D. Whitburn, The Ideal Orator and Literary Critic as Technical
                     Communicators: An Emerging Revolution in English Departments, in Essays on
                     Classical Rhetoric and Modern Discourse, R. J. Connors, L. S. Ede, and A. A.
                     Lunsford (eds.), Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois,
                     pp. 226-247, 1984.


           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
           \ 1. Regli argues that we should understand the professional writer as a “professional rhetor”
                rather than a “document technician.” Compare and contrast these two role-types, detail-
               ing what each knows, what each does, and what each values.
             2. Entrenched workplace structures and work processes often more powerfully define what
                a professional writer is, does, and can be than anything else. Describe how the following
               brief workplace scenario defines what the professional writer is, does, and can be. Then,
               assess what would have to change in terms of workplace structures and work processes
               for the professional writer to be and do what Regli advocates—"technical writers should
               be specialists in elaborate communication.”
                 Dominique is a technical writer in the Publications Department of a mid-sized software
                 development company. She has just been given the task of writing print and online docu-
                              Regli   = Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer's Expertise in Inventio       79


    mentation for part of a financial planning software package for a major bank that will use
    the software to calculate and explain bank loans to clients on-the-spot.
        Her department has a director, who also functions as the chief editor. The director, and
    a few senior writers, become part of product development teams about midway through the
    product development process. As part of these teams, the director and senior writers learn
    the software and its purposes, and on occasion they become involved in user interface
    design. Once a product is nearing the end of its development cycle, the director distributes
    to staff writers, like Dominique, various documentation writing tasks. The team of writers
    have a few early meetings, where the director and a small team of developers explain the
    software. Then the director lays out each technical writer's task. If staff writers have ques-
    tions, they have ready access to the director and lead developers. The director regularly
    checks on staff writers’ individual progress throughout their writing process. The team of staff
    writers typically meet twice more, once for a draft review and again for an editorial review.
3. Too often we define writers by their abilities to produce what might be called “target doc-
   uments”—those final, finely polished documents that are meant to communicate some
   sort of coherent message to an audience. Target document production emphasizes the
  writer's abilities in arrangement, style, and delivery. Regli argues, however, for a writer
  whose most valued ability is invention. Describe the kinds of writing/documents that
  Regli’s model professional writer might produce to aid the inventional work that is her
  expertise.




FOCUSING         ON KEY TERMS AND               CONCEPTS
Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
the field itself.
1. participatory communication
2. transmission view
3. translation view
4. articulation view
5. encode
6. decode
7. sender
8. receiver
9. mediator

The authors explore the parallels to be found by comparing descriptions of the technical communica-
tor with differing views of the communication process—the transmission, translation, and articula-
tion views of communication. In each of these views, the place of the technical communicator and of
technical discourse shifts with respect to the production of meaning and relations of power. The
authors argue from the standpoint of the articulation view for a new conception of the technical com-
municator as author and of technical communication as a discourse that produces an author.
80   Chapter 2 * What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?


           SOFOHHOORSHTAREREHEHEFARE           RTE   TEHES   SERCH   REVSHTERASSEHHRERESRESHHKREHHERESCERDER
                                                                                                   TEESE RE AE EHEHS



              THE TECHNICAL CoMMUNICATOR AS
              AUTHOR: MEANING, Po WER, AUTHORITY
           GRERORHOEeHEDUEEE       Soe   OeH    eS                           UR   STRAT   HORSTHHHOHHERHER
                                                                                                 ERE H HE KROH CHEE HEHEHE



              JENNIFER DARYL SLACK, DAVID JAMES MILLER,
              JEFFREY DOAK
              Michigan Technological University


           ik his essay, “What Is an Author,” Michel Foucault observes that in our culture,
             the name of an author is a variable that accompanies only certain texts to the ex-
           clusion of others: a private letter may have a signatory, but it does not have an au-
           thor; a contract can have an underwriter, but it does not have an author; and, simi-
           larly, an anonymous poster attached to a wall may have a writer, but he cannot be an
           author. (124)
                From this, Foucault concludes that “the function of an author is to characterize
           the existence, circulation, and operation of certain discourses within a society” (124).
           At its most mundane, this is simply to note the fact that certain discourses are
           granted the privilege of authorship while others are denied this privilege. It is more
           remarkable to notice, with Foucault, that this very fact suggests an inversion of the
           way in which we typically understand the relation between an author and a discourse:
           Rather than authors producing certain discourses, certain discourses are understood
           to produce authors. To grant authorship to a discourse is to grant that discourse a cer-
           tain authority. In a peculiar turn of events, this authority comes to reside in the au-
           thor, the author produced by the discourse itself. Thus it becomes evident that au-
           thorship is a manner of valorizing certain discourses over against others. As such,
           authorship empowers certain individuals while at the same time renders transparent
           the contributions of others.
                The discourses created by technical communicators have not been considered
           authored discourses; the technical communicator may be a transmitter of messages or
           a translator of meanings, but he or she is not—or at least not until now—considered
           to be an author. We have come to see that technical communicators, as well as other
           professional communicators, are engaged in the process of what Marilyn Cooper has
           called participatory communication.                       In   “Model(s)        for   Educating    Professional
           Communicators,” Cooper writes:

                I am defining communication as participatory communication and the role of .. . com-
                municators as one of .. . working together to create common interests, to construct the
                ideals of our society, [and in light of these ideals] to examine the ends of [our] action.
                Professionals who communicate should be involved in this endeavor too. . . . It is [at least
                part] of the function of professional communicators—whether they know it or not. (12)



           Source: Slack, J. et al. “The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority.” Journal of Business and
           Technology Communication 7 (1993), pp. 12-36. Copyright © 1993 by Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted by permission of
           Sage Publications, Inc.
   Slack, Miller, Doak   = The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority   81


THE RELEVANCE OF COMMUNICATION THEORY
There are striking parallels to be found by comparing descriptions of the technical
communicator (descriptions and redescriptions of the role, task, and ethos of that
communicator) with the progressive development of our theoretical understanding of
the communication process itself. The most remarkable of these parallels may well lie
in the emerging evidence of a symmetry between disparate images of the technical
communicator and distinct—although ultimately interrelated—models of communi-
cation. What we propose is that, by comparing different images of the technical com-
municator with parallel developments in the study of communication, a new theoret-
ical and practical image of that communicator—the technical communicator as
author—can begin to be established. Reflecting on the historical development of
communication theory over the course of the past 10 years, scholars in communica-
tion have come to acknowledge that, at least with respect to the study of mass com-
munication, two basic models of communication have gained ascendancy and, al-
though this is less widely acknowledged, that a third is now gaining ground (see, for
example, Fiske, Introduction; Carey). For our purposes, it is more useful to speak of
these models not as models per se but as distinct views of communication. This is the
case because, at bottom, each of these models seeks to express the morphology com-
mon to a collection of theories that otherwise appear more or less disparate. In this
regard, the term model is misleading. It appears to set one theory of communication
over against other such theories rather than gathering a number of specific theories
together in a general conceptual classification. We have no interest in a general con-
ceptual classification. We have no interest here in pitting one theory of communica-
tion against another. We are concerned with what these views, together, can teach us
about the place of the technical communicator.
     The first of these views—what we will refer to as the transmission view of com-
munication—can be delimited in terms of a concern, for the most part, with the pos-
sibilities and problems involved in message transmission, that is, in conveying mean-
ing from one point to another. The second—what we will call the translation view of
communication—can be understood in terms of a primary concern with the constitu-
tion of meaning in the interpretation and reinterpretation of messages. The third—
what we wiill call the articulation view of communication—can be grasped as a con-
cern principally with the ongoing struggle to articulate and rearticulate meaning.
With respect to each of these views of communication, the place of the technical
communicator is located differently. In the first, the transmission view of communi-
cation, the technical communicator is a purveyor of meanings; in the second, the
translation view of communication, the technical communicator is a mediator of
meanings; in the third, the articulation view of communication, the technical com-
municator is an author who among others participates in articulating and rearticulat-
ing meanings.
     Corresponding to variations in the place of the technical communicator as pur-
veyor, mediator, or articulator of meanings, the place of the technical communica-
tor—and of technical discourse itself—shifts in different relations of power. In the
transmission view, the technical communicator remains the neutral vehicle facilitat-
ing the exercise of power. In the translation view, the technical communicator works
82   Chapter 2 » What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           to create symmetry within the negotiation of differential relations of power between
           sender and receiver. In the articulation view, the technical communicator is com-
           plicit in an ongoing articulation and rearticulation of relations of power. Ultimately,
           looking through the lens of articulation—as we do in this article—the different loca-
           tions of the technical communicator implicate one another. That is, the technical
           communicator and technical discourse purvey, mediate, and articulate meaning.
           Likewise, the technical communicator       and technical discourse facilitate, sustain,
           generate, and disrupt relations of power. But only by looking through the lens of ar-
           ticulation can we rearticulate the technical communicator and technical discourse as
           participating fully in the articulation of meaning and thereby fully empower the dis-
           course as authorial.



           CHANGING CONCEPTIONS OF MEANING
           AND POWER: TRANSMISSION
           Of the three views of communication,        the transmission view has been the most
           clearly delineated. It has been extensively critiqued and often maligned such that it is
           nearly requisite to begin any introductory text on communication theory with an ex-
           planation and rejection of it. For the most part, contemporary communication theo-
           ries are proposed in contradistinction to it. There are, consequently, many different
           versions of the position and ongoing disagreements about its precise historical and
           theoretical contours (see, for example, “Ferment in the Field”). In general, however,
           the transmission view combines three defining characteristics:
               1. the conception of communication as the transportation of messages
               2. the conception of the message—the meaning encoded by a sender and
                  decoded by a receiver—as a measurable entity transmitted from one point to
                  another by means of a clearly delineated channel.
               3. the conception of power as the power of the sender to effect, by means of
                  this message, a desired mental and/or behavioral change in the receiver. This
                  power is the power of the sender over the receiver.
               The   term   communication    has   its origins   in the concept   of transportation
           (Williams; Oxford English Dictionary [OED]). Communications were the paths of
           transportation by means of which people at the centers of power could exercise con-
           trol over those in the peripheries. The ability to move messages in a timely fashion
           across space by means of such communications was a necessary condition for politi-
           cal, economic, and religious domination. The emphasis in the historical development
           of new technologies of communication (from walkers, runners, horses, smoke signals,
           semaphore, print, telegraph, telephone, television, satellites, computers, fax ma-
           chines, etc.) has been the transmission of knowledge and information in such a way
           as to exercise control over space and people faster and farther.
                The implications for how meaning has been understood in communication the-
           ory are made clear by examining how communication as transportation gets tied to a
           theory of transmission. The work of Shannon and Weaver can be credited as a princi-
           pal determinant in the shaping of such a view. Largely mathematical in character,
   Slack, Miller, Doak   =» The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority   83


Shannon and Weaver's conception of communication is as an explicitly linear form:
The sender wishes to transmit meaning, but to do so it must be encoded in the form
of a message (Shannon and Weaver called this information). The message is sent over
a channel to a receiver who then decodes it to get out of it the meaning that was en-
coded. The process, when perfectly executed, results in the receiver’s decoding ex-
actly the same message that the sender intended to encode.
     This basic model has been amended and elaborated on extensively (see, for ex-
ample, Fiske, Introduction; McQuail and Windahl), but its orientation to meaning re-
mains essentially the same. Meaning is something that is “packaged up” by the
sender, shipped out, and “unwrapped” by the receiver, who can then act or think ac-
cordingly. Of course, there are numerous points in the process where difficulties can
render the transmission less than perfect. The sender may encode the message poorly
such that the message fails to contain the intended meaning. The decoder may de-
code poorly, not reading the intended meaning properly. There may also be “noise” in
the channel that distorts the message so that, consequently, the meaning it contains
is not received in the form in which it was sent. (Noise may take many forms, from
static on the telephone line to the wandering mind of the listener during the trans-
mission. )
    In the transmission view of communication, meaning is a fixed entity; it moves
in space “whole cloth” from origin to destination. Communication is successful when
the meaning intended by the sender is received accurately, where accuracy is mea-
sured by comparing the desired response to the message with the actual response.
Communication fails when these responses diverge. In the case of failure, the com-
municator must locate and correct the source of the failure in the process of encoding
or in the noise of the transmission. Power is simply that which is exercised when the
communication is successful. The sender has power when the receiver behaves in the
intended manner. Power, like meaning, is something that can be possessed and mea-
sured; its measure is to be found in the response of the receiver.
     Such a view of communication appears to dominate the early stages of the theory
and practice of technical communication as it emerged within the college curricula
of engineering schools. Based on research done by Robert J. Connors, we would char-
acterize this phase in technical communication as dominating the field from the late
1800s until the 1950s but persisting into the present. In this phase, technical writing
and engineering writing are treated as synonymous, and the task of the technical
writing course is to teach engineers or their surrogates to encode the engineers’ ideas
(meanings) accurately and to provide a clear channel for transmission.
     Technical writing courses developed this way in response to a series of changes in
the practice of engineering and the development of the engineering curriculum. As
engineering and its curriculum became more technically specialized and less human-
istic during the period of rapid industrialization that followed the Civil War, com-
plaints about the unbalanced education of students in technical schools mounted.
Among other deficiencies, engineers, it was claimed, “couldn’t write.” To correct this
imbalance, courses in engineering English (later technical writing; later still, techni-
cal communication) were developed. As Connors points out, by this time the notion
of the “two cultures” split was so firmly in place that, as we would put it, the kind of
meanings that required encoding were sufficiently different to warrant a completely
84   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           different kind of English course (331). Engineering English courses were designed,
           among other things, to teach students to encode the special meanings of engineers.
                Education in this phase has two components: the education of engineers and the
           education of surrogate engineers. Both are firmly anchored in a transmission view.
           The earliest, but again still persistent, effort to inculcate the skill of technical writing
           is to teach the engineer—as sender—to be a better encoder through the use of proper
           language, grammar, and style. Through such training, the intent is that engineers will
           learn to encode messages such that they will match their intentions. Further, in
           teaching engineers to transmit those properly coded messages using the proper forms,
           the intent is to ensure that the proper channels are chosen and that the transmission
           is sent with minimal noise. In James Souther’s review of the evolution of technical
           writing course content, he demonstrates that the first kinds of courses to develop
           were those focusing on the “effective use of language, grammar, and style” (3), later
           focusing on teaching the different forms, reports, and letters routinely used in the en-
           gineering profession.
                 Developing later, and rapidly growing alongside the engineer writer, the surro-
           gate engineer—the technical writer—has become at least as important in the hori-
           zons of technical communication. The conjuncture of the increased demands placed
           on highly specialized engineers and the growing awareness of the complexity and dif-
           ficulty of encoding their ideas (meanings), gives shape to the development of techni-
           cal writing as a discipline in its own right (Connors places this in the 1920s). Course
           work and textbooks began appearing that were directed toward the technical writing
           student in particular rather than toward the engineer. In spite of this specialization,
           the technical writer is assumed to be a mere surrogate, or stand-in, for the actual (but
           busy) sender, the engineer.
               The technical writer’s job in this period dominated by the transmission view of
           communication is to assure that messages are accurately encoded and that they are
           transmitted with minimal noise over clear channels. In fact, the professional techni-
           cal writer, as surrogate engineer, is rendered essentially transparent         in the process,
           ideally becoming the clear channel itself. The very definition of technical writing of-
           ten affirms this commitment to the transparency of the communication-as-channel.
           This is often explicit, as Michael Markel writes as recently as 1988:
               Technical writing is meant to fulfill a mission: to convey information to a particular audi-
               ence or to affect that audience’s attitudes in a particular way. To accomplish these goals, a
               document must be clear, accurate, complete, and easy to access. It must be economical
               and correct. The writer must be invisible. The only evidence of his or her hard work is a
               document that works—without the writer's being there to explain. (6)
                It is relatively easy to understand the location of meaning and the conception of
           power as they operate in this phase. Meaning is posited to be in the intentions of the
           sender, that is, the engineers. Meaning is simply transferred over a clear channel.
           Technical writers are not seen as adding or contributing to meaning. In fact, if they
           are, they are not doing their job! After all, they are not engineers themselves; nor are
           they the source of the meaning to be transmitted. Nor does meaning originate in any
           sense in the receiver.
                Because meaning resides only in the sender’s intentions, and the technical writer
           is merely a surrogate encoder, when communication is successful (i-e., the intended
   Slack, Miller, Doak   * The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority   85


response achieved), the recognition, responsibility, and power is attributed only to
the sender. However, if communication fails, it is exceedingly easy to fault the encod-
ing process, that is, the work of the technical writer. Miscommunication, as this failure
is called, can be attributed to the weak use of language (inadequate encoding), failure
to include appropriate information (inadequate encoding), or poor standards for doc-
umentation (noisy channel) (see, for example, Kostur and Hall).
     Power, then, must be understood as possessed by the sender and measured by the
ability of the message to achieve the desired result in the receiver. To communicate is
to exercise power. The sender has no power if the receiver does not respond appropri-
ately. Miscommunication, the principal measure of failure in this phase, occurs when
there “is disparity between the message intended and the message received” (Kostur
and Hall 19). Technical writers, who are rendered transparent and seen as contribut-
ing no meaning, possess no power (and therefore cannot exercise it) whenever com-
munication is deemed successful. To be transparent is, after all, to provide a clear
channel for the sender to exercise his or her power. Interestingly, however, if a mes-
sage fails, technical writers can always be held responsible and called on to do a better
job at encoding or transmission. They possess, then, a kind of negative power—by
virtue of their potential status as “inadequate surrogates”—to manage the processes of
encoding and transmission poorly and take the responsibility for miscommunication.
     The persistence of thinking in these terms is evident in much of the professional
and educational realities of technical communicators. The extent that their educa-
tion focuses on stylistics, the proper use of forms, and skill at operating the technolo-
gies of communication—to the detriment of the kinds of knowledge and skills we in-
troduce later—is testament to that persistence. Technical communicators are taught,
for example, that the highest goal they can achieve is “clarity and brevity,” which
suggests a transparency that belies what they really do. On the job, the role of surro-
gate encoder is attested to by the extent that the communicator is treated as low in
the organizational hierarchy, as working for the real sender, and as expert mainly in
questions of style, form, editing, and media management. To transmit the sender’s
meaning as a perfectly executed message is the role of this communicator.


CHANGING CONCEPTIONS OF MEANING
AND POWER: TRANSLATION
The second of the views specified at the outset, the translation view of communica-
tion, a view characterized by a fundamental concern over the constitution of mean-
ing in messages in which power is negotiated between sender and receiver, has not
been as clearly delineated as the transmission view. There are numerous contenders
in the struggle to define the view developed in contradistinction to the transmission
view of communication, and the successor has not yet been fully agreed on. There
are in our reading several characteristics that the approaches to the second view
seem to share
    1. the conception of communication as a practice
    2. the conception of meaning as produced through the interaction of sender and
       receiver
    3. the conception of power as negotiated.
86   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



                If you look back at our discussion of the transmission view of communication,
           you will note a conspicuous absence: The receiver in the process of communication is
           absent in any way other than as passive recipient of the communicated or miscom-
           municated message. Receivers add no meaning; they have no power. Reception is
           considered to be essentially unproblematic. If the message is encoded properly and
           sent over a clear channel, it should have the desired impact on the receiver. In con-
           trast to this view, theorists of the translation view consider the activity of the receiver
           to be just as constitutive of the communication process as that of the sender.
           Communication is not a linear process that proceeds from sender to receiver, but a
           process of negotiation in which sender and receiver both contribute—from their dif-
           ferent locations in the circuit of communication—to the construction of meaning.
           The nature of this process of negotiation can be understood by illustrating its opera-
           tion in Stuart Hall’s elaboration of what he has called a theory of “encoding and de-
           coding.”
                Hall describes communication as a practice in which sender, message, and re-
           ceiver are but “different moments” in a “complex structure of relations.”
           Communication is “a structure produced and sustained through the articulation of
           linked but distinctive moments—production, circulation, distribution/consumption,
           reproduction” (“Encoding” 128). Each moment has its own distinctiveness and
           modality and contributes to the circulation that constitutes the communication. Hall
           describes it this way:
               The process . . . requires, at the production end, its material instruments—its “means”—
               as well as its own sets of social (production) relations—the organization and combination
               of practices within media apparatuses. But it is in the discursive form that the circulation
               of the product takes place, as well as its distribution to different audiences. Once accom-
               plished, the discourse must then be translated—transformed, again—into social practices
               if the circuit is to be both completed and effective. If no “meaning” is taken, there can be
               no “consumption.” If the meaning is not articulated in practice, it has no effect.
               (“Encoding” 128)

               The acts of encoding and decoding are thus both active processes in the circuit of
           meaning production. The sender encodes meaning (meaning 1) based on the frame-
           works of knowledge,      relations of production, and technical infrastructure within
           which the sender operates. A meaningful product is produced (a technical report, for
           example). But the receiver also actively decodes a meaning (meaning 2) based on po-
           tentially different frameworks of knowledge, relations of production, and technical in-
           frastructure. There is no necessary correspondence (or symmetry) between meaning 1
           and meaning 2, because each operates semiautonomously. It is as though the practices
           of encoding and decoding are practices of translation, from social practices to dis-
           course and then back into social practices.
                When there is symmetry between the translation processes, we can talk about
           equivalence between the two moments—a way of rethinking the concept of under-
           standing. And when there is a lack of symmetry, we can talk about a lack of equiva-
           lence—a way of rethinking the concept of misunderstanding. Misunderstanding can-
           not be explained fully by inadequate skill at encoding or by the presence of noise in
           the channel. Any asymmetry can also be understood as an outcome of alternative
           practices of encoding and decoding (Morley).
   Slack, Miller, Doak   = The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority          87


     Some translation approaches continue to use a concept such as misunderstanding
because they persist in privileging the encoding process. Hall, for example, posits the
encoded meaning (meaning 1) as the “dominant or preferred meaning” (“Encoding”
134). Then in comparing the symmetry between the preferred, encoded meaning and
various decoded meanings, decodings are determined to be within the dominant, or
preferred, code (dominant decoding); against it (oppositional decoding); wildly unre-
lated to it (aberrant decoding); or in a negotiated relationship to it (negotiated de-
coding) (Morley).
     Some translation approaches have sought to dispense with the privileging of en-
coded meanings and render both moments as more equally constitutive. These ap-
proaches, such as that of John Fiske (Television), use conceptions of an “open text,”
conceptions such as polysemy and Bakhtin’s heteroglossia. Heteroglossia asserts that
“all utterances . . . are functions of a matrix of forces practically impossible to recoup”
(qtd. in Fiske, Television 89). Polysemy asserts that a text is not merely a bearer of
meanings. Rather, a text identifies and limits “an arena within which the meanings
can be found. . . .[WJithin those terms there is considerable space for the negotiation
of meaning” (84). The more open a text, the greater the range within which receivers
are free to make their own meanings.
      Meanings are thus located in several places: in the practice of encoding, in the
discursive product, and in the practice of decoding. In the passage of these forms, “no
one moment can fully guarantee the next moment” (Hall, “Encoding” 129). Meaning
is fluid and elusive, never really fixed at any moment.
      Power is displaced and fluid along with meaning. There is power in the practice
of making meaning. Because both encoders and decoders generate meaning, both ex-
ercise power. This is no longer simply the power of sender over receiver but the differ-
ential power of each to bring their own context to bear in the making of meaning
(Fiske, Television).
     Despite the fluidity of meaning, the translation view deals uneasily with differen-
tial relations of power. The receiver can work with the product (or text) only as it has
been encoded, and that limits the openness of the text. This situation still privileges
the practice of encoding. As Hall puts it,
    Polysemy must not, however, be confused with pluralism. Connotative codes are not
    equal among themselves. Any society / culture tends, with varying degrees of closure, to
    impose its classifications of the social and cultural and political world. These constitute a
    dominant cultural order, though it is neither univocal nor uncontested. This question of
    the “structure of discourses in dominance” is a crucial point. The different areas of social
    life appear to be mapped out into discursive domains, hierarchically organized into
    dominant or preferred meanings. (“Encoding” 134)

      These dominant, or preferred, meanings must work to exercise power—to bring de-
codings into symmetry with the encodings. But decoders—always active in the decod-
ing process—variously exercise their power to disrupt the circulation of power by de-
coding differently and articulating meanings differently into practice. Communication
is thus an ongoing struggle for power, unevenly balanced toward encoding.
     Currently, the field of technical communication seems to be struggling with
(sometimes against) the implications for the role of the technical communicator as
translator. The most obvious marker of this shift is that the technical writer becomes
88   Chapter 2 » What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           the technical communicator with the recognition that communicators have some-
           thing to add beyond skillful encoding and clear channel. But there is much more
           than a name change here. To be expert in the practice of communication, to be a
           communicator in the process, signifies changes in understanding the power of the re-
           ceiver as well as of the technical communicator—changes that open a virtual
           Pandora’s box that can never again be closed.
                There are a number of new things to attend to now (sometimes old things in
           new ways): (a) Because the process of encoding is always a process of trying to fix al-
           ready slippery meanings, it is important for the communicator to understand the
           context of the sender. Hence familiarity with the technical field of the sender will
           work to ensure that in the translation process, the preferred meanings are the ones
           that get fixed. (b) Because the process of encoding is always an imperfect transla-
           tion, it is important for the communicator to become expert at understanding and
           manipulating language as polysemic. Hence familiarity with the principles of
           rhetoric and composition and skill at using their tools will work to ensure that the
           communicator will know how to fix meanings. (c) Because the receivers of technical
           communications have the power to decode differently depending on the contexts
           within which they operate, the communicator must understand how those audi-
           ences decode. Hence     rhetoric (as the art of persuasion), composition,       audience
           analysis, and reader-response research will help to ensure that communicators know
           how to encode such that particular audiences are most likely to decode symmetri-
           cally. (d) Further, once it is recognized that there is always a struggle to fix otherwise
           slippery meanings, the communicator must acknowledge and work with the differ-
           ential relations of power within which sender and receiver operate. Hence attention
           to power and ethics is essential.
                These concerns all become well represented in the field of technical communica-
           tion from the 1950s on, although attention to power and ethics seems least repre-
           sented, for reasons discussed later. The evidence of these changing priorities can be
           seen in the growing recognition of the unique contribution that can be offered by
           technical communicators as experts rather than as surrogates. This recognition is self-
           reflexive, which may account for the developing professionalization of technical
           communication. Evidence can also be seen in the changing textbooks and instruc-
           tion in technical communication (Connors; Souther). Although stylistics, grammar,
           editing, and the use of media still play a major part in the education of technical
           communicators, it has also become essential to add to their educational repertoire
           work in rhetoric and composition, linguistics, problem solving, audience analysis,
           and ethics.
                There are still employers, educators, and students whose understanding of com-
           munication is linked to the thinking of the first, or transmission, view. They have dif-
           ficulty understanding the role of all this theory in just getting the job done (see, for
           example, Vaughan 80). But what they fail to understand is that to execute the job
           with sophistication—to work toward the negotiation of symmetry between encoder
           and decoder—the theory must be brought to bear on the practice of communication.
           That requires attention to the complex and variable contexts within which senders
           and receivers produce meanings and how those contexts connect in the circuits of
           meaning and power.
   Slack, Miller, Doak   = The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority   89


     Technical communication education is still in the process of sorting out those
connections, establishing the balance between theory and practice. Becoming well
established is the need to go on theorizing, to recognize that technical communication
is not simply a skill but an academic and practical discipline that requires us to push
the boundaries of theory if we are to understand what works and why.
     But there is more to sdy about meaning, power, and ethics. The promise (for
some the pestilence) released from the Pandora’s box of the translation view of com-
munication is the power of the technical communicator as translator. Given the flu-
idity of meaning and the polysemy of any text, a translator can never be transparent.
Lawrence Grossberg describes the position of the translator in this view: “Translation
involves the retrieval and reconstitution of two different traditions, of two different
sets of possibilities and closures. It always involves us in compromise, not only of the
text’s language, but of the translator’s as well” (“Language” 221). The technical com-
municator, by virtue of the nature of the language, then, must add, subtract, select,
and change meaning. This ushers in the recognition that the communicator, too, ex-
ercises power, that is, the communicator—operating from within a different con-
text—makes meaning too. That recognition requires attention to ethics grounded in
an understanding of how power works.
     There seems to be a subtle recognition in the field that the communicator has
power, but coming to terms with the nature of that power gets lost in the demarcation
of encoding and decoding, of sender and audience, as the principal sites of investiga-
tion. Most educators acknowledge that it would be a good idea for students to under-
stand politics, power, and ethics, but there is very little explanation offered to suggest
what they might do with that knowledge on the job. But one thing is certain: A tech-
nical communicator cannot be just a technical writer anymore. What, then, do tech-
nical communicators offer? We think there are some answers suggested if we look
ahead through the lens of ongoing theorizing in communication.



CHANGING CONCEPTIONS OF MEANING
AND POWER: ARTICULATION
The third of the views specified at the outset, the articulation view of communica-
tion, a view characterized by concerns with the struggle to articulate and rearticulate
meaning and relations of power, can be delineated in contrast to both the transmis-
sion and the translation views. The transmission view acknowledges that senders do
have meanings that they desire to encode and that they do often desire a particular
response to that message from the receiver. However, the transmission view limits our
recognition of the full fluidity of meaning. The translation view reconstitutes trans-
mission to add an understanding of the receiver’s contribution to the constitution of
meaning and introduces the constitutive role of a mediator. However, translation
based on the model of encoding and decoding limits our understanding of the full au-
thorial contribution and power of the mediator.
     The translation view opens the space for the attribution of authorial power (the
Pandora’s box) but leaves it undertheorized. The opening is evident in Grossberg’s as-
sertion (cited previously) that the language of the translator must be taken into con-
90   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?


           sideration. The way through that opening is provided in the very language of encod-
           ing and decoding, specifically in thinking through Hall’s suggestion that meaning is
           “articulated in practice” and that meaning and discourse are “transformed . . . into so-
           cial practices... if the circuit [of meaning] is to be both completed and effective”
           (“Encoding” 128). The articulation view allows us to move beyond a conception of
           communication as the polar contributions of sender and receiver to a conception of
           an ongoing process of articulation constituted in (and constituting) the relations of
           meaning and power operating in the entire context within which messages move.
           That context includes not just the context of the sender and receiver (the frame-
           works of knowledge, relations of production, and technical infrastructure) but of the
           mediator(s) as well. And mediator here can no longer be thought of as just the techni-
           cal communicator but as the channels (including media and technologies) of trans-
           mission as well.
                Articulation is a concept that has been drawn from the work of Antonio
           Gramsci, considered by Ernesto Laclau, influenced by structuralism (especially
           Althusser) and postmodernism (see, for example, Deleuze and Guattari), and devel-
           oped into an identifiable theoretical position by Hall (“On Postmodernism”; “Race”;
           “Signification”). Grossberg has elaborated on the role of power in this position
           (“Critical Theory”). Articulation asserts that any identity in the social formation
           must be understood as the nonnecessary connection between the elements that con-
           stitute it. Each identity is actually a particular connection of elements that, like a
           string of connotations, works to forge an identity that can and does change (Hall,
           “Signification”). An identity might be a subject, a social practice, an ideological posi-
           tion, a discursive statement, or a social group. The elements that constitute these
           identities are themselves identities; therefore, they too must be understood as non-
           necessary, changing connections between other elements. The way in which ele-
           ments connect or combine is described as an articulation. As Jennifer Daryl Slack has
           described, articulations, the connections between elements that forge identities, have
           the following characteristics:
               (a) Connections among the elements are specific, particular, and nonnecessary—they are
               forged and broken in particular concrete circumstances; (b) articulations vary in their
               tenacity; (c) articulations vary in their relative power within different social configura-
               tions; and (d) different articulations empower different possibilities and practices. (331)

                 Any identity might be compared to a train, which is constituted of many differ-
           ent types of train cars in a particular arrangement (or articulation). Each car is con-
           nected (or articulated) to another in a specific way that, taken as a whole (as a series
           of articulations), constitutes the identity train. Any specific train is thus a specific,
           particular set of articulations—an identifiable object with relatively clear-cut bound-
           aries. But these specific articulations are nonnecessary; that is, there is no absolute
           necessity that they be connected in just that way and no guarantees that they will re-
           main connected that way. So, for example, we could disconnect (disarticulate) and
           reconnect (rearticulate) cars in a different order to constitute a new identity train.
               To say that articulations vary in their tenacity is to acknowledge that some con-
           nections are more difficult to disarticulate/rearticulate than others. Yard police, for
   Slack, Miller, Doak   ® The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority        91


example, may or may not let us in to change the order of the cars. Or the kinds of
connections between the cars may be variously difficult to manipulate.
    Some articulations are more resistant to rearticulation than others; that is, some
are more tenacious than others. When a connection between elements is particularly
resistant, the identity train remains intact and effective over a long period. When an
articulation is effective, it is said to be powerful in that it delineates what is real and
possible from what is not. Different arrangements make possible different possibilities
and practices. If we disarticulate the engine, for example, the rest of the train will not
move. And, in the process, we may have rearticulated the elements in such a way as
to necessitate a new identity. Is a string of cars without an engine a train? Is a single
engine a train? We take the answers to both to be maybe. On the other hand, a disar-
ticulated car of the type that usually completes a train will probably not be thought of
as constituting the identity train. The term “caboose” might have to suffice. But a
train without a caboose is usually still thought to be a train.
     Articulation thus points to the fact that any identity is culturally agreed on or,
more accurately, struggled over in ongoing processes of disarticulation and rearticula-
tion. For example, clearly, one element of what makes a train a train (and not, say,
just a caboose) depends on our agreed-on cultural conception of train. To stretch this
a bit, we could say that we have an ideology regarding what we empower as a train.
The ideology of train articulates to the arrangement of the cars such that we may call
a lone engine a train but not a lone caboose. But that ideology is itself an identity
constituted by its articulations, one of which is the past practices of putting trains to-
gether. Given changes in those practices, say, for example, giving cabooses their own
little engines to get around, we may rearticulate our ideology of train such that lone
cabooses   are   more    like lone   engines   and   deserve,   perhaps,   the status,   train.
Alternatively, we may alter the identity train by working to rearticulate it on ideolog-
ical grounds alone. We may, as teachers, for example, decide to teach people a differ-
ent definition (identity) of train so that a lone engine or a lone caboose is rearticu-
lated as constituting the identity. The success of our attempts at rearticulating
identities, whether purposeful or not, depends on the tenacity of the various articula-
tions that constitute it at any particular conjuncture.
     To extend this now beyond more easily identifiable identities, social practices,
ideological positions, discursive statements, social groups, and so on are also articu-
lated identities whose meanings are continually and variously rearticulated.
Dictionaries define the most widely accepted (or acceptable) identities, but there
are frequently different, alternative articulations that are either archaic or emerging.
One need only read a bit of the OED to begin to get a feel for how dramatically ar-
ticulations can change (although the OED only hints at the range of connections
that constitute the articulations). Raymond Williams’s Keywords tracks changing ar-
ticulations of key identities in Western thought and provides excellent cases of
rearticulation.
     The concepts of meaning and power are dramatically refigured in articulation
theory. Meanings cannot be entities neatly wrapped up and transmitted from sender
to receiver, nor can they be two separate moments (meaning 1 contributed by the
sender and meaning 2 contributed by the receiver) abstractly negotiated in some sort
92   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           of a circuit. Like any identity, meaning—both instances and the general concept—
           can be understood as an articulation that moves through ongoing processes of reartic-
           ulation. From sender through channels and receivers, each individual, each technol-
           ogy, each medium contributes in the ongoing process of articulating and rearticulating
           meaning. Power is no longer understood as simply the power of a sender over a re-
           ceiver or as the negotiated symmetry of the sender’s or receiver’s meanings but as that
           which draws and redraws the lines of articulation. As Grossberg has put it, power “or-
           ganizes the multiplicity of concrete practices and effects into predefined identities,
           unities, hierarchical categories, and apparently necessary relationships” (“Critical”
           92). Power is thus what works to fix meanings, that which empowers some possibilities
           and disempowers others. Grossberg explains that empowerment is “the enablement of
           particular practices, that is, as the conditions of possibility that enable a particular
           practice or statement to exist in a specific social context and that enable people to
           live their lives in different ways” (95).
               We can expand our understanding of the role of the technical communicator and
           of technical discourse significantly by tracking the implications of an articulation
           view of communication. First, by using the lens of articulation theory, we have here
           been able to track the changes in the theory and practice of technical communica-
           tion as themselves rearticulations of elements (or identities) such as technical com-
           municator, meaning, author, channel, sender, power, receiver, and so on. Second,
           however, that very lens works to rearticulate the location of the technical communi-
           cator in the process of communication, specifically in that technical communicators
           must now be understood as articulating or rearticulating meaning in (and variously
           contributing to or changing) relations of power. To gain access to those rearticula-
           tions, we will again consider the question of authorship as raised by Foucault at the
           beginning of this article.
               It is tempting here to begin to lay out all of the elements that articulate to the
           notion of author as it moves through the stages of transmission, translation, and fi-
           nally to articulation itself. These articulations would include elements such as the
           conception of authors as individuals, individuals as the source of meanings, the con-
           ception of meaning as a fixed entity—the practice of attributing ownership to ideas,
           capitalist relations of property and appropriation, a notion of the power of ideas, and
           a particular conception of progress (“if it’s new, it’s better”). However interesting that
           task might be, we must limit our treatment here to some very specific articulations
           that direct our attention to the questions of meaning and power in the theory and
           practice of technical communicators.
                In the transmission view of technical communication, authority is articulated to
           scientific and technical discourse as an objective and neutral reporting of facts.
           Humanities types may author meaning, but scientists, engineers, and, by extension,
           technical writers, merely (albeit skillfully) re-present what is already objectively “out
           there.” These are not meanings, but objective, disembodied facts. Consequently,
           technical communications (like the posters or contracts mentioned by Foucault) of-
           ten have no authors. When technical documents are conveyed by named individuals,
           these are again not authors in the sense of originating meaning—these are simply not
           discourses that produce an author. Even in these cases, however, for reasons consid-
           ered later, technical communicators are rarely listed among the conveyers.
   Slack, Miller, Doak   * The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority   93


    Technical documents and writing in science and engineering do often name au-
thors (what Foucault calls the writer). In this case, the author remains the sender in
the transmission sense but, articulated now to the concept of conveyance of scientific
fact, as an authority. Rarely, again, is authorship in these cases extended to the profes-
sional technical communicator. In part, the attribution of authorship here to the sci-
entist or engineer at the expense of the technical communicator must be explained
in terms of the tenacity of other articulated elements: the neutrality of scientific dis-
course, the practice of attributing ownership to ideas, a conception of invention as
the expression of individual genius, capitalist relations of property and appropriation,
and the persistence of the elevation of the scientific discourse over humanistic dis-
course (see Horkheimer and Adorno). In other words, specific relations of power ar-
ticulated to a particular conception of science account for the specific identity of au-
thorship in the sciences and the exclusion of the technical communicator from that
attribution.
     To evoke author in theory or practice from within the transmission view evokes,
like a chain reaction of connotations, all these articulations, which struggle—
whether purposefully or not—to hide the work that goes into fixing the identity of
that work. These articulations are nonnécessary; that is, there is no necessity that
they be connected in just this way and no guarantee that they will remain connected
in this way. Indeed, translation works to rearticulate the question of authorship, al-
though its challenge is incomplete.
     Although the translation view suggests a more elevated role for the translator, it
does not grant authority. To put it another way, the translator is seen as an expert, but
only in mediating, not authoring, meanings. This is even the case in the humanities,
where debates ensue over whether or not to give translators the same credit in tenure
and promotion reviews as authors. In technical communication, the unique skill of
individuals may be recognized as acts of mediation, but as an activity, the discourse
still does not grant them authorship. Again, we suggest that this is in part due to the
tenacity of some of those same relations of power discussed earlier: the practice of at-
tributing ownership to ideas, the conception of invention as the expression of indi-
vidual genius, and capitalist relations of property and appropriation.
     By resting on the conception of author as articulated to the contribution of
meaning, by challenging the articulation to differential relations of power between
sender, translator, and receiver as being somehow evident, and to the conception of
science as objective fact finding, we would advance the rearticulation of technical
communicators (along with media and technology) as having authorial power. We
cannot grant technical communicators status as authors merely in the scientific
sense of conveyers of fact. That would be to deny the insight of even the translation
view that asserts that the discourse of the translator (whether the translator be sci-
entist, technology, medium, or technical communicator) must be understood as in-
volved in the compromise. Rather, technical communicators are theoretically situ-
ated in the process of articulating meaning just as prominently as are the sender and
the receiver. The process of communication is then not simply a transmission or a
translation but an articulation of voices, much like what Bakhtin has characterized
as the orchestration of “heteroglot, multi-voiced, multi-styled, and often multi-lan-
guaged elements” (265).
94   Chapter 2   = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



                It should be obvious that different articulations empower different possibilities
           and disempower others. When technical communicators           are not articulated to au-
           thorship, their possible contributions are severely constricted. Whether they desire it
           or not, technical communicators are seen as variously adding, deleting, changing,
           and selecting meaning. Again, whether they desire it or not, they are always impli-
           cated in relations of power. Their work is at least complicit in the production, repro-
           duction, or subversion of relations of power. This is necessarily the case, even when
           the acceptance of the transmission or translation view may occlude the nature of the
           work that they do. Technical communicators are authors, even when they comply
           with the rules of discourse that deny them that recognition. When they are denied
           that recognition, the measure of their success can only be complete compliance with
           the articulations of meaning, power, and authorship from the standpoint of the trans-
           mission and translation views.
                The consequences of extending authorship to technical communicators are sig-
           nificant. With the recognition that the communicator articulates and rearticulates
           meaning comes the responsibility for that rearticulation. No contribution is really
           transparent; it is only rendered transparent in relations of power. So, just as the power
           of technical communicators is recognized (as they are empowered), so too must they
           be held responsible.


           IMPLICATIONS FOR PEDAGOGY AND PRACTICE
           We heard recently of an industry recruiter who—venting some frustration over grad-
           uates knowing more theory than was good for them on the job—said, “We want ro-
           bots!” This frustration has, we submit, several sources. First, and most obvious, we
           take this to be a plea for technical communicators to perform their transmission func-
           tion well. We would not dispute the need to be able to perform skillfully using effec-
           tive grammar, editing, media management, and so on.
                But there is more in the recruiter’s frustration. Second, then, this plea points to
           the fact that the field is growing rapidly in the tension between transmission, transla-
           tion, and articulation. Although that tension is generative, it does not result in easily
           written job descriptions, clear definitions of the technical communicator’s role, task,
           and ethos. Sometimes there is a lack of clear vision and agreement—among practi-
           tioners and their employers—about what is expected of a technical communicator
           and what it is he or she has to offer. In addition, however, that plea for robots suggests
           that there exists a particularly tenacious articulation between the conception of com-
           munication as the transparent transmission of messages, the neutrality of science and
           engineering, and perhaps even of the ethical neutrality of the ethics of capitalism. In
           fact, to behave as such a robot is to be complicit with the meanings thus articulated.
                It is possible to look at some of the turmoil in the education of technical commu-
           nicators and some confusions about the work of these graduates in terms of a field try-
           ing to come to terms with consequences of the technical communicator as author.
           The difficulties are twofold: One the one hand, the theoretical development of an ar-
           ticulation view has not advanced far enough to form a firm foundation for pedagogy
           and models of work. On the other hand, the changes that would result from this
           rearticulation—although theoretically and practically defensible—are not likely to
           come easily.
   Slack, Miller, Doak   = The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority          95


     Nevertheless, because professional communicators contribute to the process of
articulating meaning, whether they choose to or not, they must be able to analyze
critically the ethical implications of the meanings they contribute to. Such knowl-
edge is all the more important given the current tendency to define their work as
(ethically) transparent. In a sense, technical communicators need to be shaken from
the somnambulistic faith that their work is ethically neutral. Steven Katz’s examina-
tion of a virtually “perfect” technical document proposing changes in a vehicle de-
signed to asphyxiate prisoners during the Nazi holocaust ought to put an end to any
assertion of ethical neutrality. It is not simply how well we communicate that matters.
Who we work for and what we communicate matters.
     The nearly ubiquitous calls for technical communicators to learn more about the
technical   content    of their work     (see, for example,      Institute   of Electrical   and
Electronics Engineers), even to participate in the early stages of project design, can
be understood as easily articulated to the conception of the communicator as author.
Such technical knowledge can provide the backdrop for sound, ethical decision mak-
ing, as well as for competent transmission and translation.
     In addition to ethics and technical knowledge, it seems equally essential that
technical communicators have a superior grasp of the relationship between technol-
ogy and discourse and between science and rhetoric (Horkheimer and Adorno;
Miller; Wells; Sullivan; Katz). It is essential that we learn to analyze critically the ar-
ticulations evoked in the language of technology and science. In a sense, technical
communicators need to be shaken from the somnambulistic faith that their work is
linguistically neutral.
     Finally, we would add to the education of technical communicators knowledge of
how organizations operate—in the form of organizational communication or organi-
zational behavior. It is remarkable how little most of us understand the relationship
between power, knowledge, and organizations. It is time that we give up the faith that
the goal of communication is always clarity and brevity. In practice, the politics of or-
ganizations and organizational politics often have as their goals limiting, obscuring,
or hiding information      (Wells; Katz; Butenhoff). Naiveté about how organizations
work articulates well to the myth of the technical communicator as engaging in an
ethically and linguistically neutral activity.
     To send out technical communicators with this kind of knowledge is to send
them out armed.! It is impossible for technical communicators to take full responsi-
bility for their work until they understand their role from an articulation view.
Likewise, it is impossible to recognize the real power of technical discourse without
understanding its role in the articulation and rearticulation of meaning and power.
This understanding would thus empower the discourse of technical communicators
by recognizing their full authorial role.
Note
        1. We invite our readers to explore the consequences of this view for the role, task, and
    ethos of technical communicators as advocates for their constituencies: their employers,
    clients, and audiences. As advocates, they would be more like lawyers than their current
    status acknowledges. Although technical communicators have less in terms of codified
    law or precedent on which to draw, they could be understood as advocating for, counsel-
    ing, advising, defending, or building cases. This change in status complicates the relation-
    ship to their constituents: The counsel of communicators might be accepted, rejected, or
96   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



               resisted (or litigated against! ). But just as a lawyer’s duty is to inform employers or clients
               of the possible consequences of their actions, so too should it be the technical communi-
               cator’s duty to inform employers or clients of the consequences of their rhetoric!
                   In addition, this view suggests that the expertise of technical communicators is applic-
               able to the articulation of meaning well beyond the confines of science and engineering
               (or business). Instead, its scope can easily be understood as encompassing situations in
               which the transmission, translation, and articulation of specialized knowledge is at issue.
                   Finally, we do not offer this invitation with any pretense that advocacy or authorship
               will simplify the role, task, and ethos of technical communicators. We offer no apology,
               however, for we are advocating here changes that are already underway, even if they are
               not very well understood.

           References
               Althusser, Louis, For Marx. Trans. Ben Brewster. New York: Random House, 1970.
               Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Trans. Caryl Emerson and
                  Michael Holquist. Ed. Michael Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.
               Butenhoff,     Carla,   “Bad   Writing   Can      Be Good   Business.”   Readings   in Business
                  Communication. Ed. Robert D. Gieselman. Champaign, IL: Stipes, 1986. 128-31.
               Carey, James. Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society. Boston: Unwin
                    Hyman, 1989.
               Connors, Robert J. “The Rise of Technical Writing Instruction in America.” Journal
                  of Technical Writing and Communication 12 (1982): 329-52.
               Cooper, Marilyn M. “Model(s) for Educating Professional Communicators.” The
                  Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication [CPTSC] Proceedings
                    1990. San Diego, CA, 12 October. Ed. James P. Zappen and Susan Katz. CPTSC,
                    1990. 3-13.
               Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. “Rhizome.” Ideology & Consciousness 8 (1981):
                  49-71. “Ferment in the Field” [Special issue]. Journal of Communication 33.3
                    (1983).
               Fiske, John. Introduction to Communication Studies. New York: Methuen, 1982.
               —. Television Culture. New York: Methuen, 1987.
               Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected
                  Essays and Interviews. Ed. Donald FE Bouchard, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
                  Press, 1977. 113-38.
               Gramsci, Antonio. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Ed. and trans. Quentin Hoare
                  and Geoffrey Smith. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1971.
               Grossberg, Lawrence. “Critical Theory and the Politics of Empirical Research.” Mass
                  Communication Review Yearbook. Ed. M. Gurevitch and M. R. Levy. London: Sage,
                  1987. 86-106.
               —. “Language and Theorizing in the Human Sciences.” Studies in Symbolic Interaction
                    2 (1979): 189-231.
               Hall, Stuart. “Encoding/Decoding.” Culture, Media, Language. Ed. Stuart Hall et al.
                  London: Hutchinson, 1980. 128-38.
               —. “On Postmodernism and Articulation: An Interview with Stuart Hall.” Journal of
                    Communication Inquiry 10 (1986): 45-60.
               —.    “Race,    Articulation    and   Societies    Structured   in Dominance.”       Sociological
                    Theories: Race and Colonialism. Ed. UNESCO. Paris: UNESCO, 1980. 305-45.
Slack, Miller, Doak   = The Technical Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority    97


 —.  “Signification, Representation, Ideology: Althusser and the Post-Structuralist
    Debates.” Critical Studies in Mass Communication 2 (1985): 91-114.
 Horkheimer, Max, and Theodore Adorno. Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York:
    Herder & Herder, 1972.
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers       (IEEE). The Engineered
    Communication: Designs for Continued Improvement. Vols. 1 and 2. International
     Professional Communication Conference Proceedings. Orlando, FL, 30 Oct.—1
    Nov. New York: IEEE, 1991.
 Katz, Steven B. “The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the
      Holocaust,” College English 54.3 (1992): 255-75.
 Kostur, Pamela, and Kelly Hall. “Avoiding Miscommunication: How to Analyze and
     Edit for Meaning.” The Engineered Communication: Designs for Continued
     Improvement. Vol. 1. International Professional Communication Conference
     Proceedings. Orlando, FL, 30 Oct.-1 Nov. New York: Institute of Electrical and
    Electronics Engineers, 1991. 18-25.
 Laclau, Ernesto. Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory. London: Verso, 1977.
 Markel, Michael H. Technical Writing Essentials. New York: St. Martin, 1988.
 McQuail, Denis, and Sven Windahl. Communication Models for the Study of Mass
    Communications. New York: Longman, 1981.
 Miller, Carolyn R. “Technology as a Form of Consciousness: A Study of
    Contemporary Ethos.” Central States Speech Journal 29 (1978): 228-36.
 Morley, David. The “Nationwide” Audience. London: BFI, 1980.
 Oxford English Dictionary. 1971.
 Shannon, C., and W. Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communication.
    Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1949.
 Slack, Jennifer Daryl. “Contextualizing Technology.” Rethinking Communication.
    Paradigm Exemplars 2. Ed. Brenda Dervin et al. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1989.
      329-45.
 Souther, James W. “Teaching Technical Writing: A Retrospective Appraisal.”
    Technical Writing Theory and Practice. Ed. Bertie E. Fearing and W. Keats Sparrow.
    New York: Modern Language Association, 1989. 2-13.
 Sullivan,   Dale    L. “Political-Ethical    Implications    of Defining    Technical
      Communication     as a Practice.” Journal of Advanced   Composition   10.2 (1990):
      375-86.
 Vaughan, David K. “The Engineer: Neglected Target of Technical Writing
    Instruction.” The Engineered Communication: Designs for Continued Improvement.
    Vol. 1. International Professional Communication Conference Proceedings.
      Orlando, FL, 30 Oct.-1 Nov. New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
    Engineers, 1991. 80-83.
 Wells, Susan. “Jiirgen Habermas, Communicative Competence, and the Teaching of
    Technical Discourse.” Theory in the Classroom. Ed. Cary Nelson. Urbana:
    University of Illinois Press, 1986. 245-69.
 Williams, Raymond. Keywords. London: Fontana, 1976.
98   Chapter 2 = What Is the Relationship Between Professional Writing and Rhetoric?



           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Summarize a view of the technical communicator/professional writer as author, explain-
                ing what it means to be an author in an organizational setting.
             2. Compare and contrast how the three models—transmission, translation, and articulation
                views—understand meaning and power.
             wn Explain how each of the three models/views affects (a) the professional writer's assump-
                tions about writing, (b) the professional writer's primary goals, and (c) what the profes-
                sional writer does.
             4. Like any profession, professional writing claims an area of expertise. However, some pro-
                fessions, and especially relatively young ones like professional writing, struggle to more
                clearly determine their area of expertise. Slack et al trace professional writing’s struggle
                through the three models/views. According to each model, explain what the profession-
               al writer's area of expertise is.
             5. Assume you have just taken a job at an organization that has a transmission view of writ-
                ing, but that you have a strong trans/ation or articulation view (choose one). Describe the
                conflicts you will most likely face in your work because of yours and your employer's dif-
                fering views of writing. Then, list some of the strategies you might use to deal with these
                conflicts in a way that lets you pursue your work from, at least partially, your view.
             6. Explain the following: “... whether they desire it or not, [professional writers] are always
                implicated in relations of power. Their work is at least complicit in the production, repro-
                duction, or subversion of relations of power... .[Professional writers] are authors, even
                when they comply with the rules of discourse that deny them that recognition.” Examine
                what this statement implies about your responsibilities as a professional writer.
             CHAPTER            2

             Projects
      1. In many future instances, including the process of developing a professional writing portfo-
         lio, you will be required to define your field of work. Looking ahead to these future scenar-
         ios, this project asks you to develop a definition of your field of work.
         In order to write your definition, first identify some of the places in the articles from this
         chapter where the authors have noted, explicitly or implicitly, that rhetoric and professional
         writing expand upon and complement one another. Take time to summarize and illustrate
         these points of connection. This work will help you conceptualize and organize your report.
           Your target tasks are to write two reports, one long and academic, the other short and writ-
           ten for non-academic audiences. Your long report should summarize and synthesize your
           findings concerning the connections between rhetoric and professional writing. Your short
           report should define the field of professional writing and rhetoric and it should be appropri-
HEH
           ate  for a professional
 COHORHHHAHOKSEHRHOHHASHEORGHO
 OHEHHOHMHHETEHHRHHHOHOHEHEKED®
                                   writing portfolio section where you define your understanding of the
          field to potential employers. Both reports should describe how “rhetoric,” “professional writ-
           ing,” and “professional writing and rhetoric” are similar and different.
       . A helpful way to learn about the field of professional writing and rhetoric is to observe and
         interview a practicing professional writer. This project invites you to study “organizationally
         situated authorship” by observing and interviewing a professional writer in your area.
         In pairs or groups of three, locate a professional writer who is willing to be interviewed and
         observed at work. Based on your interests, develop questions about organizational author-
         ship that you would like to explore. Plan a series of interviews and observations that will
         help you with your inquiry. (The length and complexity of your study should reflect the time
         you have and your status as a lower-division undergraduate, upper-division undergraduate,
         masters, or doctoral student.) Develop a report of your findings that you can share with your
         class, your instructor, and the professional writer you studied.
         Note: You do not have to be in a big city to find professional writers or professionals taking
         on tasks that are primarily writing-focused. On your campus, you will find several people
         who are, at least in part, professional writers. Certainly, your campus publications depart-
         ment will have practicing professional writers. Check campus research centers, computer
         support services, admissions, athletics, museums, theaters, the president's office, and com-
         munity outreach centers. Even at smaller colleges, someone in these or related offices will
         be taking on professional writing tasks.
        You should be aware, though, that many people you could study may not consider them-
        selves to be professional writers (e.g., Web designers, public relations specialists, and even
        publications managers/editors); also, many people who might call themselves professional
        writers (e.g., poets and freelance creative writers) will not easily fit within the broad defini-
        tion of professional writing and rhetoric adopted by this text.




                                                                                                            99
                eam te     Ay     eue-tve ae
                               CJ agit niente   a




                                                            a               festSal
                                                                    - Oe   2a    co

                     eee                      ae ogi            a                     =

                          ney      eopihe fot noe es
                                  oh                                 $
otis iikornkosus                       eet                eer ee
       ett            ;   fn   picie Retna    dnp    la    Th    i
                                                                ete

alld     i   ee       poe          ee
                                    ..                    Lee


be Dewey witol grits 1h vt extwehaneingstony 4                                                             oe
eee            te tent
Gis Yet! erinttiemingy hw rmeaiymo     a      sas
rw ath         aide guidgenreicin recente
             Nh Pag Nerag                    ponct-rranl
                                                      seb
een                                                        (Sona: bo
                                                                           tea


                 :             ae
                                                          pac ae
                                                                                          4


                                                                                                  as OED
                                                                                              7        >




aan
 bao wth. rt ane                        ee
iy cele hataher 6 ecm nl sacence ayia z             _—s




wei! alors) =) an
Ge Ven sMadyit whper
mapieevinry epalsensGTMika Komal
vi               oh       og
 °
 e
 e
 e
 °
 °
 °
 e




                Professional
 «
 ®
 e
 ®
 °
 e
 e
 *




               Writing as a Social
 °
 e
 e
 e
 °
 e
 e
 °
 °
 .




                Practice
 a
 s
 e
 a
 °
 e
 e
 e
 °
 e
 °
 °
 .
 e
 a
 .
 3
 >
 .
 >
 2
 2
 °
 4     ¢ hapters 3, 4, and 5 include readings that examine more closely how professional
 °
a
.             writing and rhetoric is affected when writing is understood as a form of prac-
.
.
°      tice—a way of doing or acting. In Part 1, several selections raised the issue that pro-
e
°
.     fessional writing and rhetoric can be understood as either a productive art or a form
°
e
e     of practice. It is not necessary to see it as one or the other; it can also be seen as both.
©
°
°     Professional Writing and Rhetoric approaches it as both, dedicating Part 2 to readings
*
°
>     focused on the practice of writing and dedicating Part 3 to readings focused on writ-
°
       ing as a form of production.
            Chapter 3 examines how writing within organizations affects the practices of pro-
      fessional writers. Professional writing is certainly always located or situated within
      contexts that are larger than organizations: civic, legal, and environmental are just a
      few of these larger contexts. Still, the primary context within which the practice of
      professional writing occurs is organizational. The readings in Chapter 3 explore not
      only how we define such contexts and how they affect what we can and cannot do,
      but also how we can be active within such contexts.
           The readings in Chapter 4 explore the relationship between rhetorical and ethi-
      cal action. Anytime a profession is defined as a sort of action or practice, it automati-
      cally becomes embroiled in ethical issues. That is, when a person acts, the questions
      “Did they act well?”, “Did they act appropriately?”, and “Should they have acted dif-
      ferently?” will always arise. Such questions are part of the realm of ethics. The read-
      ings in Chapter4 examine such questions as they relate to professional writing.
           Finally, Chapter 5 includes readings that examine how technological contexts af-
      fect the practices of writers. If you think of medicine as a practice, what images are
      constructed in your mind? Do you see beds, medical tools, and perhaps biomedical


  COHOSH SHOES
THC
STE
HOH            AHREHREHEHDEOHSHESHEHHHOHESFAOHSHSSHOHDTASSHEHHEHTHEHSHTASSHHSHAHHEHTHSHOHRHHHHOHHRHAEHHEHOHGTORETAHEHOKE
CETOSTHHSOSSEHHROHSTHTHSOKRTHSEHEOSOH
HHEHHEEHOKTALELESOG
                                                                                                                           101
102   Part2     = Professional Writing as a Social Practice


              machinery? Perhaps you imagine musical instruments, specialized lighting of some
              sort, oils, and herbs? In either case, your images of the practice of medicine are em-
              bedded within certain kinds of technological contexts. The same holds true for any
              kind of practice, including professional writing. Just as medical practice is greatly af-
              fected by its technological context, so is professional writing. And just as medical
              practitioners must understand how their technological contexts have influenced, cur-
              rently influence, and might later influence their work, professional writers must also
              address such issues. The readings in Chapter 5 enhance awareness of how professional
              writing is influenced by technological contexts.
        ABO
        OOS
        OK,

bs vi         Daie
                 it De




                           Professional Writing as
                           Organizationally
                           situated Action

   ae
   eae
   BAN
   Be
   cr
                 INTRODUCTION
                 Many people who are attracted to writing as a profession are drawn by the free, rela-
                 tively unrestrained writing experiences they have had and fondly remember. To
                 think, then, about being constrained by organizational contexts is not only a little
                 distasteful to many budding writers, but it’s also quite unnerving. Many students in
                 their first professional writing classes wonder (quite reasonably), “Will I have room
                 for any creativity if | become a professional writer?” The answer is “yes,” but the cre-
                 ativity of a professional writer comes with knowledge of how organizational contexts
                 can affect writing. Therefore, the readings in Chapter 3 are selected so that you can
                 begin examining questions about organizational context, such as the following:
                         *® What is organizational context?
                         ¢ How is it related to rhetorical situation?
                         © How does organizational context constrain writing?
                         © How does it open up possibilities for writing?
                         e What are some of the ways writers can achieve effective organizationally con-
                           textualized action, even in the face of organizational constraints?
                         In classical rhetoric, place, location, context, or situation was a critical compo-
                nent of rhetorical education and practice. The practicing rhetor would pay very close
                attention to the complex relationships between time, place, speaker, and audience.
                Both rhetors and students of rhetoric were very aware that what may be appropriate
                and effective in one context may not be appropriate and effective in another. They
                would carefully and strategically adjust their speech or text to the situation at hand.
                Such awareness and application to speaking and writing defined rhetoric as an artful
                practice.
                     It would seem obvious that one would adjust her writing to the situation at hand,
                no? Perhaps you will find it surprising then that learning and practicing rhetoric as an
                att of situational appropriateness often fell, and can still fall far away from what writ-


                                                                                                               103
104   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


          ers learn and practice. The rise of belles letters—literally “beautiful letters,” which em-
          phasized style—particularly hurt the teaching and practice of writing as a contextu-
          ally sensitive art. Writers began to teach and practice an art that was focused almost
          entirely on the production of beautifully worded texts. Good and effective writing be-
          came equated with beautifully written and crafted writing.
                After world War II, teachers, researchers, and practitioners of professional writ-
           ing began to pay more attention to the wide range of writing produced in the work-
           place. Thus, attention to classical concerns for artfully responding to context were
           reawakened. This reawakening happened because teachers, researchers, and profes-
           sional writers were discovering that beautifully crafted writing was not always effec-
           tive writing. They had rediscovered what classical rhetoric had long taught.
                The readings in Chapter 3 examine the issues professional writers must under-
           stand and be able to respond to as they become authors within organizational con-
           texts. Driskill’s is the first of three readings in this chapter, and it helps you get a
           broad and general sense of the organizational context within which writing is prac-
           ticed and produced. The second reading by Katz examines more specifically one prac-
           tice of organizational writing: document review or document cycling. More specifi-
           cally, Katz examines the possibilities for what she calls individuation within this
           rhetorical process. Finally, Spilka examines the roles both writing and orality play in
           the routine but complex practice of negotiating multiple audiences within organiza-
           tional contexts.



           SCOST#   EDO   IE2eCDSEHEE   ®   *         .      °   cee   SSHSTSTMOOHAEHSOHTSOSROAELOEOEROTSE


              FOCUSING             ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. organizational situation
              2. rhetorical situation
              3. structural-functionalism
              4. Shannon-Weaver model
              5. writing as instrumental
              6. external sources of meaning
              7. internal sources of meaning
                                            Driskill       * Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations                   105

             a”          @ee     UHR                SCOHOEBSES2OLED a



 -CiprmaTRe        THE Waruna. Contec
    IN ORGANIZATIONS
 eovece           VRGPSCHORSSFTHHSLRHTKREFHEKEED          SSOSHA
                                                               IST SHORE
                                                                   SHHESTSIMAHOARHFRVOSHPHEESRO
                                                                                         FSS    L OHH              RESEDA   eae


    LIN DA DRISKILL '
    Rice University


N= attention has recently been given to writers’ knowledge of situations and pro-
      cedures in organizations. The success of many business documents seems to de-
pend on factors outside the genre features taught in textbooks or beyond commonly
investigated cognitive processes. Studying the writing decisions of analysts in a state
agency, Odell found that knowledge of other departments’ needs, an understanding of
the agency’s interests, and experience with readers’ reactions to similar documents af-
fected individuals’ writing goals as well as many decisions on content, organization,
and word choice.! The chief value of context is its usefulness in explaining the types
of meanings writers attempt to express, and readers expect to interpret, in specific sit-
uations.


THE IMPORTANCE                          OF THE WRITING CONTEXT
The way the writing context can influence the creative and interpretive processes of
writers and readers can be seen in the example of a new mutual fund’s brochure head-
line. The new fund used a market timing approach to investing, which means that it
followed technical indicators to attempt to invest in stocks only when stock prices
were rising. The headline for the direct mail piece sounded full of punch to the ad-
vertising agency writer:

      When you want both safety and growth for your capital, timing is everything! And the
      time is right, right now.

The interplay of different meanings for timing and time were better than so much of
that dry investment language, the writer thought, and he went on with another sub-
heading: “The easy and strategic way of taking advantage of stock market trends.”
The headline looked attractive to the marketing people, who were eager to spread
their enthusiasm for their new fund.
     However, the lawyer for the industry’s regulatory body, the National Association
of Securities Dealers (NASD), judged the language unacceptable and did not ap-
prove the piece. The language implied that the reader stood only to benefit by invest-
ing in this fund. Further, it implied that the investor’s money would be safe as the
value of the investment grew. The risks of the investment were not mentioned. As a
result, despite talent and creative effort, considerable expense and time were lost.
    The error was both the fault of the agency writer, who lacked knowledge of the
NASD’s standards, and of the company, which had not hired writers with legal expertise

Source: Driskill, Linda. “Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations.” Writing in the Business Professions, ed. Myra
Kogen, 1989, pp. 125-145.       Copyright 1989 by the National Council of Teachers of English. Reprinted with permission.
106   Chapter 3 =   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          or structured its review process to assure detection of the unacceptable language.” Many
          investment brokers use only literature that has been approved by the NASD because
          they fear lawsuits by investors. A plaintiff would surely have a greater chance of success if
          unapproved literature were involved.
               An awareness of the effects of specific situations, company procedures, and factors
          inside and outside the company has come to be known as the “business savvy” that
          only the experienced can apply in a writing situation. Many writing instructors, for ex-
          ample, would not know of the NASD and its standards for the literature of investment
          companies. Such awareness can be the difference between an expert writer and a
          novice, yet not all experienced workers are expert writers. Employees and managers, as
          well as teachers, consultants, and researchers, need good analytic tools and guides for
          writing decisions. This article presents a conceptual tool to help writers systematically
          tap the contextual sources of corporate savvy that affect communication success. It
          first discusses current theoretical models’ inattention to the context for writing deci-
          sions. This article presents a conceptual tool to help writers and the meaning of docu-
          ments. It then presents components of a model of the organizational context for com-
          munication and discusses how the model can systematize organizational savvy for the
          benefit of teachers, consultants, and writers in companies.


          WHY CURRENT MODELS NEGLECT CONTEXT
          Current models and theories of business communication tell little about the effects of
          context on writing processes. Most theoretical positions seem to have one of three
          orientations:   One   group   attends   to   particular   aspects   of communication   events,
          including genres (such as letters, reports, meetings, and presentations), the individual
          writer’s processes, or communication technologies. The second emphasizes
          communication systems and their abstract properties, such as flexibility and direction of
          flow. The third, recently proposed by Faigley, urges interdisciplinary research into the
          social aspects of writing.

          Approaches Attending to Particular Aspects of Communication

          Genres and traditional rhetorical modes (comparison, analysis, etc.) have been the
          bases of communication courses focusing on types of communication events or gen-
          res: the formal report, the interview, the sales letter, etc. Many textbooks are orga-
          nized to serve such courses, which emphasize features of format and abstract patterns
          of organization, rather than (1) what is meant or understood, and (2) how these
          meanings matter in the context of the organizational situation.4 These courses focus
          on the means for expressing meaning, not the meanings themselves.
               Another narrowly focused approach has been the study of individuals’ writing
          behavior, usually in a laboratory setting with fictional writing assignments. Courses
          based on this approach have emphasized individual writing strategies, especially for
          invention and arrangement. Studies of individuals’ cognitive processes can help dis-
          tinguish between experts’ and novices’ strategies and identify types of writing plans.
          Most of this research has involved fictional settings because of a desire to standardize
          the situation and facilitate comparison.
                                    Driskill      = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations       107


     Recently, attention has been focused on the effects of different technologies,
such as electronic mail, dictating systems, and word processing on communication.
These studies tend to overlook context and to focus instead on the technology as the
source of behavior. These studies sometimes are linked with investigation of individ-
uals’ processes or with surveys of workplace practices.5 Each of these focused ap-
proaches may reveal valuable insights, but each is likely to be incomplete, to over-
look some aspects of the writing context.

Systems Approaches to Organizational Communication

Although the systems approach seems to involve writing contexts, its theorists are
concerned neither with meaning nor with transactions among individuals. For exam-
ple, the structural-functionalist communication scholars, whose assumptions are con-
sistent with structural-functional management theory, think of the company as a
large, abstract machine:
      Structural-functionalism requires that traits or concepts that are vital to the continuance
      and performance of the organizational be specifically identified. Furthermore, the investi-
      gator is charged with the task of specifying the mechanisms within the organization that
      bring about the desired levels of those traits. Consequently, if degree of flexibility, direc-
      tionality of message flow, message initiation, innovation / maintenance messages are the
      traits under scrutiny, structural-functionalism requires one to search for those key factors
      that lead to different levels of each trait. As more is learned abut the factors, it becomes
      more feasible to bring the traits under control, and so effectively “manage” communica-
      tion in the organization. (emphasis added)*®

      The structural-functionalists, like many other organizational communication the-
orists, were heavily influenced by the communication model published by Shannon
and Weaver in 1949.7 Based on telecommunication systems, their theory is concerned
with the generation of information, its flow rate along its channel, and ways to mathe-
matically encode information to reduce “noise” in the system (Figure 1).
     Shannon and Weaver were not concerned with why people needed to communi-
cate with one another or with the content of the messages. Although Osgood subse-
quently criticized the Shannon- Weaver model because it did not deal with meaning,
the model was irresistibly easy to grasp for people familiar with transportation sys-
tems, and it was adopted by scholars from many fields, including biochemistry, genet-




  Information   Message                  Signal             Channel   {Te-am      Vessage     Destination
_ Source                                           X




                                                   Noise
                                                   Source


Figure 1. Shannon-Weaver model of communication. The model does not represent meaning or
intentions of persons.                                                       ete    ses
Source: Shannon and Weaver 1949, 7. Copyright 1948 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois.
Reprinted by permission of the University of Illinois Press.
108   Chapter 3 =   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          ics, chemistry, and business communication.’ This model influences the works of ma-
          jor communications scholars, such as Berlo, Lasswell, McCroskey, and Schramm,
          each of whom modified the model somewhat.?
              Schramm revised the Shannon-Weaver model in three elaborations designed to
          indicate that communication     takes place in an environment,       involves people (not
          just information sources), and produces feedback. Schramm’s modifications certainly
          offered a more complete representation of communication that the Shannon-Weaver
          model did, but the categories of “environment” and “feedback” are still too general to
          produce detailed analyses of the communication context, communications processes,
          or products.
               In “Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective,” Faigley reviews the develop-
          ment of genre and cognitive perspectives, but omits the systems approach, which has
          actually had great prominence in business communication. He suggests a “social per-
          spective” in which writing is defined as an action “that takes place in a structure of
          authority, changes constantly as society changes, has consequences in the economic
          and political realms, and shapes the writer as much as it is shaped by the writer.”
          According to Faigley, those taking the social perspective must move beyond the tra-
          ditional rhetorical concern for audience to consider issues such as social roles, group
          purposes, communal organization, ideology, and finally, theories of culture.!°
               Faigley’s intent is to create categories of research perspectives, each of which in-
          cludes many specific approaches to the study of writing. He hopes to foster a new ap-
          preciation of the relevance of other disciplines’ methods and premises for the study
          of writing by describing developments in several disciplines. Faigley uses social in a
          broad sense that does not reconcile the many specific meanings of the term used by
          sociology, psychology, anthropology, and other disciplines. The model of context
          proposed in this article is intended as an example of the approach Faigley would
          classify as “social.” However, this discussion will avoid social as a theoretical term be-
          cause of the multiple definitions it has in other disciplines. Context can help ex-
          plain what a document means, what ideas it contains, why the writer would try to
          express his or her ideas in a particular way, and why readers who occupy particular
          roles in different parts of an organization would be likely to respond to a document
          in particular ways. Context has this power because it is a source of meaning for writ-
          ers and readers. Experience in their particular roles in an organization context has
          taught them to view specific topics in particular ways, to interpret particular infor-
          mation according to certain formal or informal rules, and to value certain styles as
          preferred or appropriate.
               Meaning in business communication has its primary source in the writing con-
          text because communication involves actions and goals; it is instrumental. Writers in
          businesses seek to create meanings that produce sales, cooperation, approval, compli-
          ance, or agreement. Meaning in business writing is not limited to subject or topic
          knowledge. The professional may indeed have stored in memory academic knowledge
          learned outside of a business or professional setting, but access to such knowledge is
          gained via constraints and objectives that occur in a particular situation.
               Any subject or issue is framed by the perceived external environment (society,
           government, competitors, resources, markets) as well as the perceived internal envi-
           ronment of the company (size, structure, technology, culture, individuals, roles, and
                              Driskill   = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations   109


forms of argument or reasoning). Perceptions of the external and internal environ-
ments converge to define the situations in which workers participate. Almost all
these situations have rhetorical or communication requirements, because most busi-
ness functions require communication. Advertising new positions available; solicit-
ing bids from vendors and suppliers; applying for licenses; consulting with lawyers,
lenders, and advertising media; promoting and selling products and services: all in-
volve communication.
     This emphasis on the external and internal environments as sources of meaning
tend to deemphasize the personality of the individual writer or reader as a source of
meaning. The persona of the organizational writer is defined by a somewhat different
set of features than is that of the poet, political orator, or personal friend who writes
in a nonorganizational or academic setting. In most business situations, the roles of
writers and readers, their powers of action and expertise as members of the organiza-
tion, are more important than other aspects of their personal identity. Nevertheless,
the writer or speaker does have the creative power to transform the sources of mean-
ing and to develop original solutions to organizational problems and novel writing
strategies. The training of the individual in the reasoning methods of specific profes-
sional disciplines and the range of writing plans known by the writer may strongly af-
fect the action of the individual writer. The national or regional culture (for example,
“good ole boy” cultures) may also be important.
    Thus, a rhetorical situation, with its range of reader/audience roles, purposes, sets
of properties, genres, individuals, and temporal and technological constrains, must be
seen as embedded within a complex context that affects both writers and readers.
The “subject” or “topic” is not context-free, but situated, involved in what the mem-
bers of the organization must know, feel, or believe in order to accomplish their goals.
Columb and Williams have proposed a descriptive technique for describing the mul-
tiple cues writers in professional situations can embed to elicit specific expectations
and invoke particular domains of information.!!


EXTERNAL SOURCES OF MEANING:
MUTUAL FUNDS INDUSTRY EXAMPLE
Context as a source of meaning can be understood more easily if we separate those
sources of meaning external to the firm from those within the firm. These two differ-
ent types exert different kinds of influences in varying degrees and are involved at dif-
ferent times and in different circumstances. In most firms, external sources matter less
frequently; internal sources affect virtually every document. A regulatory body can be
called a source of meaning because writers consult its definitions and criteria when
representing their ideas.
     External sources of meaning are interpreted, not absolute, influences on writers
and readers. Some management scholars assume that language and reality are isomor-
phic, that reality is what language declares it to be. This belief is illustrated by the
way management scholars speak about an organization’s environment as an indepen-
dent entity, not recognizing that organizations construct their own definitions of
their environments, primarily through language usage. Recent debate over the useful-
ness of economic indicators illustrates how “facts” of the environment, such as the
110   Chapter 3 « Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


           “money supply” and “credit availability,” are interpretations, not absolutes, of the
           firm’s environment.                                          *
                Smircich argues that instead of treating the organization’s environment and the
           organization itself as objects or givens, managers must become aware of the language
           processes essential to everyday corporate life:
               The possibility of organized action hinges on the emergence and continued existence of
               common modes of interpretation that allow day-to-day activities to be taken for granted.
               In the context of group interaction, it is this routinization that we refer to as being orga-
               nized. When groups encounter novel situations, new interpretations must be constructed
               to sustain organized activity. The process of negotiating meanings for these events may al-
               ter current understandings and thereby change the formerly taken-for-granted way of
               life.!?
                In the case of the mutual fund industry, mentioned earlier, several organizations,
           groups, and factors affect how writers in mutual funds companies interpret informa-
           tion and compose documents. A mutual fund is an investment company that sells
           shares of its investment portfolio to investors and uses the money to purchase securi-
           ties, such as bonds, stocks, gold certificates, U.S. government securities, or other in-
           vestment instruments. Writers in such companies may use external sources of mean-
           ing (Figure 2) to assess opportunities, obtain information, analyze audiences for
           company documents, and create writing plans.
                The recent history (1984-86) of mutual funds that specialize in U.S. government
           securities illustrates the dynamic effect of the external environment as a context for




                                           Wall Street           Securities
                                           Journal               Markets




                                               Mutual Fund Company |, __,|         Competitors




                                                     Investment
                                                                              Brokerage
                                                     Company
                                                                              Companies
                                                     Institute



                                             National or Host Culture c       :

                Figure 2. Model of the communication context showing external sources of meaning
                in the mutual funds industry.
                                   Driskill   = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations   111


writing. Until late in 1984, only a few funds concentrated their assets in U.S. govern-
ment securities, such as treasury bonds, treasury bills, and mortgage-backed certifi-
cates such as “Ginnie Maes.” These investment instruments are often traded in units
of $100,000 or more, amounts that formerly had kept smaller individual investors
from owning them. The attractive features of these funds were (1) the high rates of
interest that were being paid and passed along to the owners of the mutual fund
shares, and (2) the fact that the securities owned by the funds were backed by the
U.S. government, which had never defaulted on any payment of principal or interest
when due. The ads emphasized the annualized rate of interest currently paid and they
usually included words such as “safety,” “security,” or “guaranteed,” along with such
patriotic symbols as the domes of capitols, flags, and eagles (Figure 3). 3
     In 1985, investment companies created many more of these funds that special-
ized in U.S. government securities. Advertisements began to appear that attracted
billions of dollars into these new funds.!4 The Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), however, perceived two problems with these attractive new funds. First, since
nearly all the funds were new, they had no performance record, over time, on which
investors might base their estimates of future performance, and the SEC was worried
that investors would rely on the current high annualized rates being advertised.
Second, although the government would indeed guarantee that the rate of interest
would be paid, the value of the mutual fund shares was not guaranteed; instead, it
would fluctuate according to interest rates. If interest rates on other investments rose
higher than those being paid on the securities owned by the fund, the value of fund
shares would decline. This risk, called interest rate risk, was believed to be poorly un-
derstood by investors.
     The NASD began to send back comments on ads submitted for review and re-
quested qualification of the language in the ads. NASD lawyers, for example, recom-
mended that safety be changed to a high degree of safety (Figure 4). In the fall of 1985,
the SEC asked the mutual fund trade association, the Investment Company Institute
(ICI), to deal with the problems arising from misunderstood statements about safety,
and to make uniform the widely varying practices in calculating and reporting the
yield rates for these funds. Weeks went by as meetings of representatives from more
than a thousand mutual fund companies met at the ICI. Concerned about the poten-



                                         FRANKLIN
                         U.S.      Government          Securities Fund

                                High Yield and Safety
                                              12.15%

     Figure 3. Partial text from early Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund advertise-
     ment emphasizing yield and safety.
     Source: The Wall Street Journal, November 1983.
112   Chapter 3 »   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action




                                            High Income
                                          For Your IRA,
                                         With A High
                                       Degree of Safety
                              Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund


                                                 oe
                 Figure 4. Partial text from Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund advertisement
                 modified to “high degree of safety.”
                 Source: The Wall Street Journal, March 1985.




          tial risk of lawsuits, companies began changing their advertising, even before the ICI
          could reach any agreement, removing the yield figures (and the explanations of how
          they were calculated), and changing more and more to metaphorical language to sug-
          gest indirectly the attractiveness of the product (Figure 5).
                Interest rates on government securities declined in early 1986 because the yields
          dropped on the new certificates and bonds the funds could buy. At the same time, the
          marketplace was exerting an influence on one marketing point: high yields. By mid-
          March 1986, few government securities funds were advertising yields. Only after the
          ICI memorandum of agreement was completed in June 1986, did yields begin to reap-
          pear in the ads, now consistently defined and presented in uniform phrasing and let-
          ter heights. The external environment, with its complex structure of audiences, in-
           formation sources, and influences, had clearly affected what mutual fund companies
           managing government securities funds decided to say in their publications and how
           writers of these ads created meaning.


           INTERNAL SOURCES OF MEANING:
           THE CHALLENGER ACCIDENT EXAMPLE
           Internal as well as external sources of meaning affect writers in companies. The struc-
           ture, size, and technology of the organization will affect the roles people play and the
           ways rhetorical situations are defined.!5 In the 1960s the contingency theorists at
           Harvard showed that the volatility and complexity in a firm’s environment dictate
           the amount, type, and frequency of information the organization processes to accom-
           plish its mission. Since a firm’s structure is a vehicle for gaining access to and commu-
                                      Driskill   ® Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations   113




                           eee
                                                        Franklin and GNMA.
                                                            It's a perfect fit.

                    Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund


     Figure 5. Partial text and illustration from Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund ad-
     vertisement using metaphor.
     Source: The Wall Street Journal, April 28, 1986.




nicating information, organizations try to adapt their structures to secure and dissem-
inate most efficiently the information they need from the environment.!6
     These theorists have been criticized for not paying more attention to other fac-
tors within the firm that affect communication, such as corporate culture and the in-
dividuals of the firm. Individuals are also sources of meaning and their preferences
can affect writing practices. Powerful executives can also affect how writing is pro-
duced; their preferences tend to become maxims of the company culture. Space does
not permit discussion of all aspects of the model proposed in Figure 6.
     Corporate Culture: As management consultants and scholars interested in non-
quantitative measures of corporate behavior focused attention on the distinctive
practices of individual companies in the late 1970s and ‘80s, a picture of the power of
shared values, norms, roles, rituals, and “the company way” began to emerge. Such
features of a company compose what has been called its corporate culture. In a discus-
sion of the variety of anthropological theories of culture whose concepts might be ap-
plied to the study of corporate culture, Allaire and Firsirotu define corporate culture as
a system of shared and meaningful symbols manifested in myths, ideologies, values, and
multiple cultural artifacts. They show that adopting a particular definition of culture
commits one to specific conceptual assumptions and ways of studying culture.!7
     They argue in favor of a definition of corporate culture that separates the socio-
structural system of the firm from its cultural system. For the purpose of understand-
ing communication processes, we need to be able to separate culture and structure. If
culture cannot be separated from structure, then the effects of these processes on
114   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action




                                                                                                     Communication
                                                                                                     Requirements
                                     Structure



                                          Size



                                     Technology              corer
                                                             Culture


                                                                                                           ark



                            Regulatory             |                       Trade
                       ae                              ea                  ee|                             pees                     a
                            5             CTA               ee         :    aS     ce          pos               yates          a   |

                   :                                        onalorHost Culture                            oars
                   ®   ei       PILOTS   SEES ES                                        hose   22,       ee      iY   Oe   Wc

                   Figure 6. Model of how external environment and firm's characteristics define
                   business situations and communication requirements.



           communication cannot be separated. Yet, the structure and the shared values and be-
           liefs of the organization may have quite different effects on writing practices. In a sur-
           vey of one financial services company, two groups of employees expressed the same
           attitudes toward problem solving, but they differed significantly in their ability to
           solve problems. One group had no problem-solving unit or routine process; the other
           had a weekly meeting at which a special committee could discuss problems and make
           decisions. Not surprisingly, the second group was much more successful in dealing
           with problems. Structure, not culture, was the obstacle in that firm.
               Like organizational structure, but different in its operation, culture is a powerful
           determinant of the definition of situation and of rituals and procedures: Who speaks
           to whom? Who listens to whom, when, and why? Corporate culture contributes many
           of the interpretive standards that affect writers’ choices of content, persuasive ap-
           proach, and word choice. In one company, | was told to delete hope from a draft. “We
           don’t hope for anything around here,” I was advised, “We decide what we want and
           then we make it happen.”
               Not all organizations have strong cultures—strong values, norms, and beliefs that
           guide action. Ouchi and others have classified cultures as ranging from those whose
           members are fully involved to those whose members are only slightly involved.!8 One
           would expect that in organizations where “anything goes so long as you get the work
           out,” either communication processes would vary or external sources, such as the pro-
           fessional standards for accountants, engineers, and others, would influence communi-
           cation practices.
                               Driskill   = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations   115


     It is important to note, however, that not all strong cultures facilitate communi-
cation; Bate reported difficulties experienced by companies whose cultures repressed
communication about problems, prevented naming of individuals who were the
source of trouble, and resisted cooperative problem solving and the expression of
emotions. Communication and participation could be improved only by attacking
the pervasive beliefs of the companies’ cultures; and that is not an easy matter.!9 We
need to include corporate culture in our models of communication, not because it
plays a uniform role in all corporate communication, but because it accounts for a
complex of interdependent factors whose configuration affects what people say, write,
and read. Models of organization communication that assume uniformity in many ar-
eas of organization life cannot account for the variety of documents and events in
companies. Recognizing corporate culture as a source of meaning will reduce some of
the confusion and enable us to identify other influences more easily.
     With a variety of techniques, organizational communication scholars could in-
vestigate how culture influences the creation of written or spoken language.
Rhetorical analysis of transcribed protocols might be able to show how norms and
values are transmitted, enacted, negotiated, and affirmed. Scholars also might analyze
objects, such as written reports, videotapes, and marketing materials, for cultural
properties and for their function in rituals. Rymer has analyzed narratives and anec-
dotes used by managers to identify important issues, to show relationships among
events and actions, and to motivate employees in a midsized manufacturing firm.2°
     Incorporating corporate or organizational culture into models and theories of
corporate communication should, therefore, enable us to describe and account for
different attitudes toward communication, variations in the meanings expressed by
documents, variations in preferences for modes and genres, types of analogies and
anecdotes, types of arguments, and roles of writers and readers. Such an array of con-
siderations would substantially expand the degree of organizational savvy that an ex-
perienced writer might bring to bear on a single writing task.
    Definitions of Situation/Prescriptive Paradigms: Throughout this article I have de-
scribed the effects of the writing context,       both within and without    the firm, as
though writers consulted their understanding of context directly in making writing
decisions. More typically, I believe that these understandings are concentrated in
groups of ideas associated with particular definitions of situation. Frequently, writers
will respond to questions such as “What kind of situation would you call this?” or
“What does a writer do in such a situation?” with lengthy rhetorical prescriptions for
audience adaptation, genre choices, production schedules, stylistic preferences, and
argument strategies.
     Definitions of situation reflect the values of corporate culture, the requirements
of organizational structure, the influences of the firm’s external environment, and
ways of thinking and arguing that derive from the individual’s training, education,
and professional role. Writers usually define situation in terms of the work of the
company or a department’s routines and operations. A situation involves nonrhetori-
cal elements: actions such as delivering goods to a particular location, manufacturing,
operating machinery, or making calculations. Often associated with this definition,
however, are one or more rhetorical situations. For each rhetorical situation there is an
116   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           associated set of roles, terms, concepts, reasoning procedures, and history that serves
           as a guide to thinking, believing, and acting.                mo
                The definition of the rhetorical situation controls to a large extent which events
           or perceptions count as facts, which concepts apply to these facts, and which as-
           sumptions are used to evaluate them. The definition of situation determines which
           words are chosen as appropriate to the subject, which roles are available, which
           range of actions is appropriate, and with whom one is to communicate and how. The
           reasoning processes preferred by individuals seem to be heavily influenced by their
           education and professional training. Engineers frequently create narrative argu-
           ments, arguments that are stories explaining what happened when and under what
           circumstances.   Managers   more   frequently use social science reasoning      in which
           much of the “reasoning” is actually justification of assumptions underlying the
           model applied to the subject. Understanding the differences between the reasoning
           of different groups of professionals within a company or organization may be a pri-
           mary key to anticipating the organization and use of evidence in documents pro-
           duced by that group or person.
                The Space Shuttle Challenger Accident Case: When a writer implements an inap-
           propriate rhetorical situation, serious, even tragic, problems can occur, as suggested in
           the report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger
           Accident.?! The Commission concluded that the mechanical cause of the Challenger
           accident was the failure of the pressure seal in the aft field joint of the right Solid
           Rocket Motor (Vol. 1, p. 72). The Commission also found as a contributing cause a
           flawed decision-making process:
               Testimony reveals failures in communication that resulted in a decision to launch...
               based on incomplete and sometimes misleading information, a conflict between engineer-
               ing data and management judgments, and a NASA management structure that permitted
               internal flight safety problems to bypass key Shuttle managers. (Vol. 1, p. 82)

           The report suggests that the critical failures occurred during two teleconferences and
           an intervening caucus or meeting of the Morton Thiokol engineers involved in the
           production of the Solid Rocket Motor. These electronically conducted meetings were
           part of the preflight readiness review process held in the 24-hour period before the
           space shuttle flight began. The NASA managers and the Thiokol engineers appear to
           have begun the meeting with a shared understanding of the rhetorical situation (pur-
           poses, roles, type of reasoning), but in this instance the NASA managers’ model-
           based logic and the Thiokol engineers’ analogical reasoning from a few specific in-
           stances produced a tragic conflict.
                Participants from NASA, especially Lawrence B. Mulloy, the Solid Rocket
           Booster project manager at the Marshall Spacecraft Center who was in charge of the
           teleconferences, talked about the rhetorical situation as a collaborative probing of
           the data to determine whether the model of assumptions on which previous launch
           decisions had been based justified a change in that model. As a consequence of this
           approach, NASA officials were determined to treat a potential safety problem with
           the O-ring seals as a deterrent to launch only if data could be presented that invali-
           dated the decision model used in the past. Mulloy looked at the teleconference as an
           encounter in which NASA and Thiokol would review the “Launch Commit
                                  Driskill   " Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations        117


Criteria” and determine whether any of these conditions essential for launching
would be violated by the predicted conditions on the morning of January 28, 1986.
     The Thiokol engineers recommended that NASA should not launch at a tem-
perature colder than the coldest previous launch (53°F). The implication of this rec-
ommendation was that the shuttle should not be launched on the following day,
when temperatures were expected to be less than 30°F Mulloy was very certain in his
testimony about the rhetorical moves appropriate to his position in that circum-
stance:
    Chairman Rogers: Didn’t you take that to be a negative recommendation?
    Mr. Mulloy: Yes sir. That was an engineering conclusion, which I found this conclusion
    without basis and I challenged its logic. Now, that has been interpreted by some people as
    applying pressure. I certainly don’t consider it to be applying pressure. Any time that one
    of my contractors . .. come to me with a recommendation and a conclusion that is based
    on engineering data, I probe the basis for their conclusion to assure that it is sound and
    that it is logical. (Vol. 5, p. 829)
    We were simply looking at the engineering data and reviewing those engineering data. The
    concern, of course, that was being expressed was for the low ambient temperatures that were
    predicted for the night and the effect those low ambient temperatures would have on the
    propellant mean bulk temperature and on the joint particularly. (Vol. 5, p. 829)
     In Mulloy’s judgment, his communication tactics did not constitute pressure on
the Thiokol engineers. Mulloy would not allow Thiokol to use any other reasoning
process than the provision of data which showed that a launch commit criterion
would be violated; but the Thiokol engineers did not have that kind of data at their
disposal. Mulloy had a list of criteria that constituted a model for his decision mak-
ing; the engineers had limited concrete data from a few flights and laboratory tests.
The engineers who had handled the charred O-rings from the coldest previous flights
were frustrated by NASA's unwillingness to consider the implications of charts show-
ing the history of O-ring erosion on previous flights and pictures of damaged O-rings,
as the testimony of Roger Boisjoly describes:
    And there was an exchange amongst the technical people on that data as to what it
    meant. ... But the real exchange never really came until the conclusions and recommen-
    dations came in.
       At that point in time, our vice president, Mr. Bob Lund, presented those charts and he
    presented the charts on the conclusions and recommendations. And the bottom line was
    that the engineering people would not recommend a launch below 53 degrees Fahrenheit.
    (Vol. 1, p. 91)
        One of my colleagues that was in the meeting summed it up best. This was a meeting
    where the determination was to launch, and it was up to us to prove beyond a shadow of a
    doubt that it was not safe to do so. This is in total reverse to what the position usually is in a
    preflight conversation or a flight readiness review. It is usually exactly opposite that. . . .
    (Vol. 1, p. 93)
Although Mulloy maintained that customary argument structure had been followed
for review of the evidence (he invited the Commission to call other witnesses who
would confirm that he had handled the meeting as usual), the Thiokol people felt that
the purpose of the rhetorical situation had been reversed. They were used to arguing
118   Chapter 3 #   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          inductively from example. Once they had had sufficient examples to provide statisti-
          cally sound proof for NASA’s model of launch criteria, the two reasoning processes,
          though different, had allowed agreement. When Thiokol had too little data, NASA
          managers were unwilling to look at the implications of specific examples.
               After NASA Manager George Hardy, deputy director of the Marshall Space
          Flight Center, declared the Thiokol recommendation “appalling,” and Mulloy asked
          whether Thiokol wanted him to wait until April to launch, Thiokol management be-
          gan to feel the company’s interests as sole supplier of the rocket engines were threat-
          ened and asked for a meeting among Thiokol people with the teleconference lines
          switched off. During this exclusive meeting of Thiokol people, a senior manager ex-
          plicitly revised the rhetorical situation by asking the vice president, Lund, to change
          roles, “to take off his engineering hat and put on his management hat” (Vol. 1, p. 94).
          Chairman Rogers followed up on this testimony by asking Lund, “How do you ex-
          plain the fact that you seemed to change your mind when you changed your hat?” Mr.
          Lund was not able to answer this question directly. Apparently, management interests
          differed sufficiently from engineering interests to produce a different conclusion, and
          Thiokol subsequently agreed that no launch criteria would be violated and the
          launch could proceed. Mulloy did not convey these concerns to the top two levels of
          the review process and the shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after the launch on
          January 28, 1986.



          ORGANIZATIONAL SITUATIONS AND
          RHETORICAL SITUATIONS
          Because of rapid changes in business environments        and within companies,     many
          rhetorical situations must be redefined to achieve greater congruence between orga-
          nizational situations and rhetorical situations.
               In the example of the mutual fund’s reliance on market timing, the agency
          writer saw the situation as “writing a brochure for a client . . . essentially, marketing
          a parity product by claiming extra attention for it, making it stand out on the shelf.”
          The writer perceived investors as breakfast cereal buyers, the sole audience for the
          message on the box. He needed to understand that, although he was writing a
          brochure for a client, the rhetorical situation involved audiences other than con-
          sumers and marketing professionals. He need to include in the rhetorical theater
          other powerful actors, including regulatory associations, competitors, lawyers, in-
          vestment brokers, as well as investors. By using a broader model of the sources of
          meaning in the writing context, practitioners and teachers alike can construct more
          accurate definitions of organizational situations and rhetorical situations to guide
          their decision making.



          IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
          Teachers can use the model described and the results of research to improve instruc-
          tion. Recognizing the force of culture, technology, and situations can enrich our pro-
                                Driskill   = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations    119


duction and use of cases in the classroom. Brockman identifies six features of a suc-
cessful case, including “fullness of the rhetorical contexts,” which he associates with
purpose, audience, and role.?? A full rhetorical context should go beyond these three
factors to include the relation between the organizational situation and the rhetorical
situation, and the culture, values, history, and ways of thinking that determine the
criteria for judging communication practice in a real organization.
      Further, by studying rhetorical situations, we may identify how these provide
roles for individuals trained in particular disciplines, particular ways of thinking and
arguing. We can help students anticipate how the skills learned in accounting, f-
nance, real estate, strategic planning, and other business functions will be applied in
communication, and we will be able to describe more precisely the relationship be-
tween business communication and other management disciplines.
      We must teach students to analyze organizational and rhetorical situations and to
develop strategies for achieving greater congruence between them, given the culture,
size, and technology of the organization. Finally, we should emphasize the excitement
and pleasure of dealing with the demands of rhetorical situations. Creativity and per-
sonal involvement are essential for meeting the complex challenges of real organiza-
tional contexts. Too often, technical and business communication has been taught as
a dry, mechanical skill devoid of personal interest. When we recognize the impor-
tance of the context for writing in organizations, we see the significance of the issues
resolved through communication processes. Writing well is not merely conforming to
genre conventions, as some of the genre-based approaches have implied. Commu-
nicating in organizational contexts is essential to the vitality, and even to the sur-
vival, of organizations and society in a technical era.


Notes
         i. Lee Odell, “Relations between Writing and Social Context,” in Lee Odell and
    Dixie Goswami, ed., Writing in Nonacademic Settings (New York: Guilford Press, 1985),
    249-80.
        2. Brief examples throughout the article, such as this one, are drawn from my consult-
    ing experience.
         3. Lester Faigley, “Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective,” in Lee Odell and
    Dixie Goswami, ed., Writing in Nonacademic Settings, 231-48.
         4. Exceptions to these texts would be Marya Holcombe and Judith Stein’s Writing for
    Decision Makers (Belmont, Calif.: Lifetime Learning, 1981); and Mathes and Stevenson’s
    Designing Technical Reports, both of which emphasize the effect of the organization’s struc-
    ture and problem-solving activities on meaning.
         5. Jeanne W. Halpern and Sarah Liggett, Computers and Composing: How the New
    Technologies Are Changing Writing (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984).
        6. Richard V. Farace, Peter R. Monge, and Hamish M. Russell, Communicating and
    Organizing (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1977), 93. Structural-functional refers to the
    relation between a firm’s structure and the business functions performed. Most firms at-
    tempt to group together workers with similar goals and expertise to foster cooperation and
    efficiency.
         7. Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communication
    (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949). The image of reified language in this model
120   Chapter 3 ®    Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



              has been thoroughly analyzed by Ragnar Rommetveit, “Prospective Social Psychological
              Contributions to a Truly Interdisciplinary Understanding of Ordinary Language,”
              Language and Social Psychology 2; 2, 3, 4 (1983), 89-104.
                   8. C. E. Osgood, “Psycholinguistics: A Survey of Theory and Research Problems,”
              Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 49 (October 1954).
                   9. David K. Berlo, The Process of Communication: An Introduction to Theory and
              Practice (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1960); Harold D. Lasswell, “The
              Structure and Function of Communication in Society,” in John Byrson, ed., The
              Communication of Ideas (New York: Harper and Row, 1948), 37-51; J. C. McCroskey, An
              Introduction to Rhetorical Communication (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972);
              Wilbur Schramm, The Process and Effects of Mass Communication (Urbana: University of
              Illinois Press, 1954).
                  10. Lester Faigley, “Nonacademic Writing.”
                  11. Gregory G. Colomb and Joseph M. Williams, “Perceiving Structure in Professional
              Prose: A Multiply Determined Experience,” in Writing in Nonacademic Settings, 87-128.
                  12. Linda Smircich, “Implications for Management Theory,” Linda Putnam and
              Michael Pacanowsky, ed., Communication and Organizations: An Interpretive Approach
               (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1983), 221.
                  13. Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the ads of funds managed by only one company, Franklin
              Funds, because of lack of space for additional figures. However, by consulting the Wall
              Street Journal for this period, the reader can see that statements are generally true about
              funds of this type.
                  14. 1986 Mutual Fund Fact Book (Washington, D.C.: Investment Company Institute,
               1986).
                    15. Effects of size, structure, and technology have been studied for over twenty-five
              years, especially by the Tavistock group in England and by the contingency theorists at
              Harvard. The sociotechnical models can be useful for analyzing patterns of communica-
              tion, but other sources of meaning must be considered as well. T. Burns and G. M.
               Stalker, The Management of Innovation        (London:   Tavistock Publications,   1961); Joan
               Woodward,       Industrial Organizations: Theory and Practice (London: Oxford University
               Press, 1965).
                    16. Paul R. Lawrence and Jay W. Lorsch, Organization and Environment            (Boston:
               Harvard Business School, 1967). For a historical review, see Henry Mintzberg, The
               Structure of Organizations: A Synthesis of the Research (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
               Hall, 1979).
                   17. Yvan Allaire and Mihaela E. Firsirotu, “Theories of Organizational Culture,”
               Organization Studies 5, 3 (1984): 193-226.
                    18. Alan L. Wilkins and William G. Ouchi, “Efficient Cultures: Exploring the
               Relation between Culture and Organizational Performance,” Administrative Science
               Quarterly 28, 3 (1983): 468-81.
                   19. Paul Bate, “The Impact of Organizational Culture on Approaches to
               Organizational Problem Solving,” Organization Studies 5, 1 (1984): 43-66.
                  20. Jone Rymer Goldstein, “Myths and Stories in Corporate Communication” (Paper
               presented at the Association for Business Communication Convention, Chicago,
               November 1985).
                  21. Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, 5 vols.
               William P. Rogers, chairman (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
               1986).
                                 Driskill   = Understanding the Writing Context in Organizations     121


      22. R. John Brockmann, “What Is a Case?” in R. John Brockman, ed., The Case
   Method in Technical Communication: Theory and Models ({[Lubbock, Tex.]: Association of
   Teachers of Technical Writing, 1984), 1-16.

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 _1) Referring to Driskill’s discussion of current models of business communication, summa-
     rize the three orientations to professional writing. Create a professional writing scenario
     from your own or another's experience and describe how each of the three orientations
     would affect how writers in such a situation would approach the task of writing.
  2. Given only Figure 2 as a visual aid, prepare a ten-minute presentation for your class that
     defines how each of the external sources affects the writing context for the mutual fund
     brochure headline.
  3. Referring to Figure 6 as a model, prepare a visual that summarizes Driskill’s textual analy-
     sis of the Challenger accident. Your visual should identify the key organizational features
     of the accident and visually define the relationships between them.
  4. Driskill claims that organizational environments are interpreted, not isomorphic. Explain
     what she means. Then, using the mutual fund brochure headline or Challenger accident
     situation as an example, compare and contrast the processes, contents, and purposes of
     viewing organizational contexts as interpreted vs. isomorphic.
| 5) Driskill identifies a number of ways writing is affected by corporate culture and definitions
     of organizational and rhetorical situations. Referring to Driskill’s article and your own
     experience, generate a list of the ways writing can be affected by these two organizational
     variables. Then summarize how these two variables impacted the Challenger accident.
  6. Assess the effectiveness of Figure 6. Your assessment should identify the strengths and
     weaknesses of the model and be supported by professional writing examples, either real
     or imagined.
  7. Describe how organizational contexts can both constrain and motivate professional writ-
     ers. Then, examine some organizational strategies professional writers might employ to
     (a) negotiate the constraints and (b) take advantage of the opportunities found in orga-
     nizational contexts. Use specific examples to illustrate your discussion.




  FOCUSING        ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
  Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
  Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
  lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
  in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
  the field itself.
  1. socialization
  2. individualization
  3. organizational individuation
  4. personal authority
  5. social authority
  6. situational authority
  7. authority
  8. agent for change
122   Chapter 3     =     Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


           SSSR   ORDER   ERBERERYOFTERGeHS        aye             ARERSROEHUE   HEH   EREEHEHROATHOHOHEHEOHEHEKSEOHRHEH
                                                                                                                    TASES



                  Wririnc REVIEW AS AN OPPORTUNITY
              FOR INDIVIDUATION |
           PHRBAMTALHEROCHHMFTRERAAHE
                               HHH HOH            ERGOONEK   ee   ROORTHAEREEHSHE
                                                                      DER EHSEDEHTHRSEREREORE HERTHA HHE BEBE ED



              SUSAN M. KATZ

          Ove.                       assimilation—including socialization and individualization, as de-
               scribed in chapter 1—is not a temporary process that affects workers only in the
          early months or years of their careers; rather these processes occur repeatedly, either
          as the individual changes jobs or as changes occur in the organization affecting the
          individual’s role. Thus we can say with some certainty that an understanding of these
          processes is important for understanding how learning and change take place in orga-
          nizations. However, I would suggest that there is an additional dimension to assimila-
          tion, which I call individuation,! that occurs concurrent with socialization and indi-
          vidualization. While organizational communication provides some basis for
          proposing a concept such as individuation, there has been no research that examines
          how individuation might occur. That is, we don’t know how newcomers become rec-
          ognized for their distinctive talents and skills or how that recognition relates to their
          ability to gain authority, challenge the status quo, and become agents for change in
          organizations. This chapter will explore the concept of individuation and will
          demonstrate how the unique aspects of nonacademic writing review facilitate this
          process.


          SOCIALIZATION, INDIVIDUALIZATION, AND INDIVIDUATION
          As discussed previously, socialization is the process by which newcomers learn about
          and adapt to the goals, values, and appropriate behaviors of the organization; it is a
          process whereby the organization attempts to shape the individual to meet organiza-
          tional needs. Individualization refers to the efforts that a newcomer makes to resist
          that shaping and change particular aspects of his or her role or the organization to

           Source: The Dynamics of Writing Review: Opportunities for Growth and Change in the Workplace, Susan M. Katz, “Writing
           Review as an Opportunity for Individuation,” 1998, pp. 73-98. Copyright © 1998 by Ablex, a division of Greenwood
           Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc., Westport, CT.
            ' The term “individuation” is used in psychology to refer to the development of distinctive personalities (Jung,
           1923), and in this sense is most often used to describe child and adolescent development. Individuation has also
           been used to describe the willingness of individuals to publicly differentiate themselves from others in their envi-
           ronment (Whitney, Sagrestano, & Maslach, 1994). The newer definition includes a greater focus on voluntary
           individuation (such as when an individual creates a distinctive public persona represented by body piercing or
           tattoos), as well as the involuntary individuation that occurs in situations where the individual may be individ-
           uated by others based on physical attributes (such as when a woman or African-American is hired in a previ-
           ously all-male or all-white setting).
               In either definition, individuation refers to the separation of the individual from the “other.” In the Jungian
           definition the other is the mother or, more generally, the family (Fromm, 1941; Mahler, 1968). In Whitney,
           Sagrestano, and Maslach’s (1994) definition, the other is any social group the individual chooses to separate
           from or is involuntarily differentiated from.
               When I speak of organizational “individuation,” | am thus building on earlier concepts, but adapting them
           to the organizational environment.
                                             Katz    = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation           123


 meet personal needs. However, significantly missing from discussions of individualiza-
 tion is any explanation of how newcomers are able to effect such resistance and
 change. The concept of individuation can help explain why some newcomers are
 able to have a profound influence not only on their own role within the organization,
 but on the organization itself.
      Organizational individuation is the process by which the individual develops his
 or her particular character within the organization. The process can be viewed as a
 series of behaviors:
       ¢ The individual performs assigned tasks as he or she thinks appropriate based on
         training and/or experience.
       ¢ More experienced workers (particularly supervisors) observe the manner in
         which the individual (particularly a newcomer) performs these required tasks.
       ¢ These observations and evaluations lead to a perception about the capabilities
         of the individual.
       ¢ These perceptions may involve the recognition of unique attributes (skills, tal-
         ents, or other qualities).
Depending on the value of these attributes to the organization and on the particular
circumstances prevailing within the organization at any given moment, this recogni-
tion may lead to the granting of the authority necessary to effect change.
     In summary, individuation is a process that occurs as the talents, skills, or other
attributes that make an individual distinct become evident through the normal inter-
actions and productive efforts of that individual. Opportunities for individuation oc-
cur in the writing review process, where a supervisor or other experienced reviewer
can recognize and evaluate the skills displayed by the writer in the text under review
and in the interaction during the review process.
    Just as the collaborative nature of nonacademic review facilitates socialization
processes, this interactive experience is particularly well suited to individuation.
Individuation can only occur when the individual is allowed to express his or her
thoughts, ideas, and opinions. In writing review sessions, the reviewers in this study
were anxious to hear from the newcomers so that they could produce the best possi-
ble document to meet the needs of a specific context. The reviewers all acted as col-
laborators who were willing to share their authority over the text under review.
     In the review of a specific text, the supervisors often had a better sense of many of
the factors influencing the document than the newcomers. However, the supervisors
were also open to ideas and suggestions from those newcomers. In situations where
suggestions are encouraged, newcomers have opportunities to demonstrate their tal-
ent and skills. The demonstration of these talents and skills can result in individua-
tion when those attributes are recognized by the supervisor or by the group as unique
to the individual. Furthermore, when these talents and skills are seen as superior to
similar talents and skills of others, the newcomer may be individuated as an “expert.”
     Thus another way to think about individuation is to frame it in terms of exper-
tise. When a newcomer is individuated during writing review, it is often some form of
expertise that is being recognized.? Research in many different fields suggests that ex-

 2 This is not to say that expertise is the only basis for individuation. However, expertise played a significant
role in the individuation of several participants in this study, as will be described later in this chapter.
124   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          pertise can lead to increased authority.? A brief review of the connection between ex-
          pertise and authority will provide a context for a discussion of writing review as an
          opportunity for individuation.


           The Expertise/Authority Connection

           In The Nature of Expertise, Chi and Glaser (1988) provide us with characteristics—
           such as large quantities of knowledge in a particular domain and automated solutions
           to common problems—that define an expert. However, the many discussions of ex-
           pertise in The Nature of Expertise (Chi, Glaser, & Farr, 1988) deal with well-defined
           domains, such as chess or typing. When we move to less well-defined domains, such
           as writing, interpersonal communication, or management, we have more difficulty
           creating a precise, consistent definition of expertise. Moreover, although a connec-
           tion between expertise and authority seems to be generally accepted in many fields,
           the connection between expertise and authority differs depending on the disciplinary
           perspective of the scholar investigating the connection.


           Personal Authority

           In rhetoric and composition, Geisler (1994) has described expertise as deriving from
           knowledge and ability in two spaces: a domain content space and a rhetorical process
           space. As individuals gain content knowledge within a particular domain and the
           concomitant rhetorical skills to express themselves in that domain, they move to-
           ward expertise. As individuals gain this expertise, they gain authority to participate
           in the conversation of a discipline (Penrose & Geisler, 1994). Along similar lines,
           Carter (1990) describes an expert writer as an individual who has developed both
           general and local knowledge. That is, an expert writer is one who has learned general
           strategies of writing applicable to any domain as well as the specific conventions of a
           particular community. The source of the individual’s authority to speak is a personal
           authority based on the knowledge that he or she possesses.
                These descriptions of authority based on expertise do not exist in a vacuum, but
           they do not rely on any external source; thus I have given them the designation, “per-
           sonal authority.” Although the expert is working/writing/interacting within some
           context, the authority comes from the individual’s personal confidence in his or her
           ability and right to speak within a disciplinary community. That is, individuals de-
           velop confidence as they gain experience within a discipline and recognize that
           “there is authority to spare” (Penrose & Geisler, 1994, p. 517). All professionals must
           first belong to a disciplinary community before they can belong to an organizational
           community, and they carry the personal authority developed within that disciplinary
           community into the organizational community. In the workplace, that personal au-
           thority continues to provide some level of self-confidence to the individual.
                 While these definitions of expertise based on personal authority do not ignore
           context, they do ignore the authority that comes from context. More specifically,

            3 There are many sources of authority in organizations in addition to expertise, but a discussion of those
           sources goes beyond the scope of this study. For information on other sources of authority in organizations, see
           Pfeffer (1992).
                                  Katz   * Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   125


they ignore the authority that comes when others in the community recognize and
accept the individual’s expertise.

Social Authority

Like Geisler, Penrose, and Carter, cognitive psychologists Sternberg and Frensch
(1992) acknowledge the importance of personal authority in their discussion of ex-
pertise, but they add a social component to their definition. Sternberg and Frensch
call the personal component of expertise “cognitive competence” (p. 191). Cognitive
competence, which focuses on the knowledge of the individual, encompasses the do-
main content knowledge/rhetorical process knowledge model of expertise as well as
the general/local knowledge model. However, Sternberg and Frensch suggest that
models of expertise that only look at cognitive competence “miss an important aspect
of expertise, namely, its attributed aspect. In the real world—as opposed to many psy-
chological laboratories—expertise is, in large part, an attribution. A person is an ex-
pert because she is regarded as such by others” (p. 194). When an individual is
viewed as an expert by a community (e.g., disciplinary, organizational, or workgroup
community), he or she gains certain benefits including greater respect, access to re-
sources, and power and influence (p. 196). This greater power and influence that is
granted to experts is what I am referring to as social authority.

Situational Authority

Situational authority is based on the immediate needs of a particular organization at a
particular time. As organizational communication scholars Conrad and Ryan (1985)
tell us, “a highly expert individual will gain power from this personal attribute [exper-
tise] only if provided opportunities to publicly use that expertise to solve significant
organizational problems” (p. 240). In other words, the individual’s expertise has to be
valued by the organization if it is likely to lead to authority. Situational authority may
be temporary: It is likely that once the problem has been solved or abandoned, the
expert will lose the authority granted for the duration of the problem-solving effort.
      It is probable that individuals must first have confidence in their own expertise,
must have personal authority, before they can gain an attribution of expertise from a
community. It is difficult, but not impossible, to imagine someone who has been iden-
tified as an expert by a group who does not recognize that expertise him- or herself.
However, it is impossible to imagine an individual gaining situational authority with-
out first having the social authority from attribution of expertise. As Littlepage,
Robison, and Reddington (1997) demonstrate, “accurate recognition of expertise can
facilitate the utilization of expertise” (p. 145).

Authority and Newcomers
Persona, social, and situational authority are additive: Each source contributes to
the amount of authority the expert is able to wield, each source builds on the other.
Any one source delivers some authority; in combination they deliver greater author-
ity. Personal authority develops throughout an individual’s life; social and situa-
tional authority develop anew each time an individual joins a community. A new-
comer to an organization may bring a certain level of personal authority, but the
126   Chapter 3 ®   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          social and situational must develop over time, -as colleagues come to know and re-
          spect the newcomer’s expertise.
               We would not expect a newcomer, particularly an entry-level newcomer, to gain
          social or situational authority easily or rapidly. However, the newcomers in my study
          did gain varying levels of authority fairly quickly, typically through their rhetorical ex-
          pertise. That is, individuals who gained authority:
              ¢ had a well-developed sense of the importance of audience,
              ¢ consciously thought about the purpose of the documents they wrote,
              ¢ created well-supported arguments, and
              © wrote clear, coherent, grammatically correct prose.
          These attributes became obvious to others in their organizations during the writing
          review sessions that focused on the texts produced by these newcomers. The new-
          comers’ rhetorical expertise led to authority in these instances because:
               e the newcomers had confidence in their own rhetorical skills and were not hes-
                 itant to make suggestions (they had personal authority);
               ¢ the newcomers participated in writing review sessions that highlighted their
                 thetorical skills (giving them an opportunity for individuation);
               e the supervisors recognized and valued the rhetorical expertise displayed by the
                 newcomers (giving them social authority);
               ¢ the newcomers’ skills were needed to solve problems within the organization
                 (giving them situational authority).

          Not all the newcomers in this study gained significant levels of authority, but we
          can look at those who did, and those who did not, and use the concepts of per-
          sonal, social, and situational authority based on expertise to analyze their ability
          to gain authority, challenge the status quo, and become agents for change in their
          organizations.


          GAINING AUTHORITY
          In studies of organizational behavior, the concepts of authority, influence, and power
          are used in many different ways. Bacharach and Lawler (1980) suggest that “some au-
          thors tend to equate [authority and influence]; some tend to equate power with influ-
          ence and assert that authority is a special case or power; and others see authority and
          influence as distinctly different dimensions” (p. 27). In addition, some scholars say
          that authority and influence are subsets of power; others say that power is a function
          of authority; yet others suggest that all power can be subsumed under the concept of
          influence (pp. 27-28). For the purposes of this discussion, “authority” refers to the
          ability of an individual to influence or make decisions affecting the work of the orga-
          nization, including not only his or her own work, but also the work of others.

          Darlene and Personal Authority

          Darlene gained authority from all three sources, personal, social, and situational. She
          had personal authority based on her self-confidence as an expert writer with some-
          thing to contribute to the organization. Darlene’s confidence in herself as a writer be-
                                            Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation           127


came evident to me and to her supervisors during writing review, where she did not
hesitate to make comments and suggestions. Furthermore, during writing review
Darlene demonstrated her awareness of the purpose of review, that the goal was to
produce the best document. Unlike many novices, she did not resent the changes
that reviewers made to her text:
      Darlene: Well, I really don’t mind changes as long as it makes it better or at
               the very least does it the same but different.
Her willingness to accept revision was also evident in the discourse-based interviews
that I conducted with her. In those interviews, I frequently rewrote sentences or
phrases from reports and asked the newcomers how it would affect the report if we
substituted my version for the original. Darlene’s response after reading one such re-
vised sentence+ demonstrated her lack of investment in her own prose:
      Darlene:      Ooh, I like this one better! (Laughter.)
        Susan:      (Laughter.) You like which one better?
      Darlene:      This one better.
         Susan:     Oh, the one I wrote?
      Darlene:      Yeah.
        Susan:      Why? What’s significantly different about what I wrote that makes
                    itone 2
      Darlene:      Well, um, it seems to get to the point a little more and you’re
                    speaking, saying that [the responses to the concerns itemized in the
                    report] are necessary instead of turning it around and saying with-
                    out these this will happen, so, that’s probably a much better way to
                    word it.
      Although this response demonstrated Darlene’s openness to revision, she did not
hesitate to defend her own text when she felt that suggested changes were inappro-
priate or unwarranted. In describing a brochure that she had written for the Agency,
she told me that she had written a draft, made changes suggested by Harry (the direc-
tor) and Tom (an assistant director), and then
      About a week later, when she thought the brochure was finished, Harry came and said
      that Dick [the other assistant director] had made some suggestions for changes. Darlene
      did not like the suggestions that Dick had made. She prepared written arguments to
      counter Dick’s suggestions. She told me that when she reads comments on her writing, if
      she agrees, she just says fine. But if she disagrees, she writes out an argument.

      In this instance, Harry agreed with Darlene’s argument, and she did not have to
incorporate Dick’s suggestions. Although she did not always get her way, her sense of
personal authority allowed her to speak up when she felt strongly about a change. In
a review session with Gene discussing the first report that she wrote on her own,
Gene suggested that the document would “flow better” if she rewrote a bulleted list

 4 The original sentence read: “Without appropriate and detailed responses to the concerns we identified,
[provider] risks both the financial stability and programmatic integrity of its [programs].” My revision read:
“Appropriate and detailed responses to the concerns we identified are necessary for the financial stability and
programmatic integrity of [provider's programs].”
128   Chapter3    = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


          using parallel construction. In fact, what we suggested was that she start each bul-
          leted item with the words “collection rates,” instead of

                   “Collection rates. . .”
                   “
                    Revenue for services. . .
                                      ®      ”



                   “linsurance company name], the largest third party insurer. . .”
                   “ third party insurers. . .”
                   “Collections on uninsured self-pay clients. . .”

                 Her response to his suggestion was forthright:
                 Darlene:   I think honestly that’s what I tried to avoid.
                    Gene:   Yeah?
                 Darlene:   Just because, I mean, it flows better probably, but | just think that
                            it’s like, kind of dull if you do that? Like, every bullet starts the
                            same?
                    Gene:   Hmmmm?
                 Darlene:   Not that | would be averse to doing it, but that’s
                    Gene:   Okay.
                 Darlene:   just kind of my opinion. An audit report is boring enough as it is
                            without having every sentence starting exactly the same way.
          In the final version of the document, where less confident newcomers might have
          changed the text as Gene suggested, Darlene compromised: She left her text un-
          changed for the first two items and used “collection rates” for the last three.
               Writing review sessions gave Darlene the opportunity to demonstrate her per-
          sonal authority as a writer because:

                 ¢ Both Darlene and the supervisors understood the purpose of the review as the
                   production of the best possible document.
                 e The supervisors were willing to share their authority over the final product with
                   Darlene in order to meet that purpose.
                 e The face-to-face setting gave Darlene the opportunity to explain and, when ap-
                   propriate, defend her rhetorical choices. These explanations demonstrated
                   both her writing skill and her interpersonal communication skills.


          Darlene and Social Authority
          Through sessions such as the ones described here, Darlene’s supervisors and col-
          leagues came to recognize her expertise and grant her social authority. Social author-
          ity may have been granted fairly quickly because of the nature of the writing review
          process at the Agency: With multiple reviews of each document at different levels
          within the organization, Darlene’s skills became evident to many different individuals
          within a very short time. These more experienced individuals described her as some-
          one who could write clear, coherent prose, and (what was more astonishing to this
          group) they said that she liked to write. While she was a competent accountant, the
          attribution of “expert” that was granted to her was directly tied to her writing ability.
                                    Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation    129


    For example, her writing ability was the only specific skill mentioned when she
was nominated for the “Employee of the Year Award.” The nomination, written by
Dick (an associate director) reads, in part:
    For an auditor with only about one year’s [sic] of experience, Darlene has progressed faster
    than any other trainee in the Agency. Darlene’s evaluations have all been at the out-
    standing level.
       Darlene is an extremely talented writer who has greatly assisted the Agency in clearing
    the backlog of reports and issuing reports on a timely basis.

     The first paragraph in this nomination describes Darlene’s overall capabilities,
but it is the mention of her writing ability in the second paragraph that distinguishes
her from the other auditors. While the nomination goes on to applaud her efficiency,
productivity, enthusiasm, and initiative, no other disciplinary talents are mentioned.
The nomination written for another newcomer, Rebecca, contained no mention of
writing at all, even though writing is a critical component of the position. Instead,
Rebecca was nominated for “her technical ability” (which referred to her auditing
ability) and the fact that “she possesses great computer skills.”
     In addition to Darlene’s nomination, evidence for attribution of expertise can be
found in conversations, interviews, and meetings with other newcomers as well as
many senior members of the Agency.

    e My initial interview with Rebecca took place just as she was about to begin an
      audit where she would be working with Darlene for the first time. She told me
      that she thought that Darlene was “a really good writer” and that she would
      “learn a lot about writing from Darlene by working with her on this project.”
    ¢ In an early interview, Al, the most senior AIC in the Agency, recalled the first
      time he read something that Darlene had written. He said, “I thought I had
      died and gone to heaven. She puts everyone else in the Agency to shame.”
    ¢ In a meeting, Gene referred to Darlene as “the report maven” (“maven” is
      Hebrew for “expert”).
    ¢ In a casual conversation about the importance of writing for auditors, Dick
      talked for several minutes about Darlene as someone who was “unbelievable.”
      He told me that “it is so rare to find an auditor who can write.”

Darlene was granted social authority by this organization because her writing was ex-
ceptional; individuals became aware that her writing was exceptional because she
participated in writing review sessions. Specifically, because the process of writing re-
view at the Agency involved multiple reviews at several levels, Darlene had exposure
to most of the senior staff within a few months of her employment. The attribution of
expertise was virtually universal and opened the door for her to gain situational au-
thority.

Darlene and Situational Authority
Darlene gained situational authority when Harry, the Director of the Agency, de-
cided that her expertise could help solve a significant new problem. The problem was
created when a new governor was elected, defeating the three-term incumbent.
130   Chapter 3 # Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           Although most of the employees in the Agency were somewhat protected through
           their union membership, Harry was a political appointee. The election of a new gov-
           ernor put his position in jeopardy. In addition, the new governor had run on an aus-
           terity platform, and ever since his inauguration he had been promising massive cuts
           in the state workforce. More specifically, there had been discussions of completely
           eliminating the Department of which the Agency is a small part. Gene explained the
           situations to Darlene this way:

                I think (Harry’s] saying, “If all the reports come out really quick, I [Harry] get to keep my
                job.” ... Politically, he’s in an unprotected job and anybody who’s owed anything could
                be put into it instead . . . | think he has some things to worry about that are very real, and
                I think that one of the things he’s done is to say to himself, one some level, if we get re-
                ports out faster then everything will be okay.

           Darlene’s writing expertise is crucial to the process of getting “reports out faster.”
           Previously, AICs and managers took months, sometimes even years, to draft and pol-
           ish a report. Harry had hoped that Darlene would be able to intervene and speed up
           the process. The extent to which she was able to do this came from personal, social,
           and situational authority based on her expertise as a writer.
                Darlene was not hired for her rhetorical expertise. She was hired because she had
           the right credentials (a B.S. in Accounting) and the right kind of experience (several
           years as a bookkeeper) to work as an auditor. Unlike Darlene, however, Luke (the
           marketing representative at the engineering firm) was explicitly hired because of his
           expertise as a marketing representative.

           Luke and Personal Authority

           At ECI, marketing representatives were not expected to be technically knowledge-
           able, but they were expected to have well-developed interpersonal communication
           skills that would allow them to solicit business opportunities for the firm. With al-
           most six years of experience as a marketing rep for an adhesives manufacturer, Luke
           had a lot of useful contacts and the ability to understand technical subjects without
           actually having a lot of technical knowledge. Both Walt, Luke’s supervisor, and Luke
           himself told me that Luke was hired to fill a gap in ECI’s marketing department, that
           ECI needed Luke to help take the firm in a new direction.
                Luke’s personal authority developed through his experience: He had been very
           successful working for his prior employer, had prevailed over many other applicants
           for the job at ECI, and was confident of his ability to succeed in his new position.
           This confidence was evident in his behavior at staff meetings.
                Although the marketing department consisted of eight people, the weekly staff
           meetings were not attended by everyone. Typically, Walt, (the director of marketing),
           would meet with the four external reps to discuss their recent activities and future
           plans. The three internal reps did not attend most of these meetings. Although Luke
           had only been with ECI for two weeks when he attended his first staff meeting,> he
           did not hesitate to contribute to the meeting: He asked questions, volunteered infor-

           > There had been no meeting during the first two weeks because one of the reps was on vacation and one was
           on business in another part of the state.
                                            Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation           131


mation about his background, reported on upcoming events of interest to the group,
and instigated discussions about the organization’s past experience in specific areas.
In fact, although socialization theory suggests that newcomers often spend their first
few weeks quietly observing the behavior of their peers, particularly in new situa-
tions, Luke took charge of the opening part of this meeting by asking Walt a question
that led to a discussion of Luke’s plans for the upcoming weeks. In essence, Luke had
diverted the meeting away from Walt’s planned agenda.
     Luke’s ability to take control of the meeting demonstrated his self-assurance.
Furthermore, the level of detail he provided as he described his plans demonstrated
his confidence that he was doing what was expected of him. He told where he would
be each day for the following two weeks, including information about a seminar and a
two-day conference he planned to attend and the prospective clients he planned to
visit during a three-day trip through another part of the state. When questioned by
Walt or others in the group about the nature of the business of each of these prospects
and his reasons for calling on them, Luke was able to supply answers and information
to support his plans. A few days later, | observed him make 17 phone calls in the
space of two hours, setting up appointments with prospective clients or gathering in-
formation from other EC] employees. He worked diligently, took copious notes, made
several appointments, and generally seemed confident in working with little obvious
supervision. Luke’s ability to work without supervision so soon after joining ECI re-
flected his sense of personal authority, his sense that he knew what he was supposed
to do and how to do it.

Luke and Social Authority
Perhaps because he had such a strong sense of personal authority, his social authority
developed rapidly. After Luke’s second staff meeting, | spoke with Walt about Luke’s
progress:
      Walt and | talk about how easily Luke seems to have fit into the group. Luke seems so
      comfortable, confident. Walt says that is why they hired him—he’s genuine, sincere, real.
      Six weeks later, Walt was more specific about Luke’s performance:
         Walt:     I like him, and he’s very sensible about how he’s going about [repre-
                   senting the firm]. And he’s also conscientious about what he’s do-
                   ing. He’s concerned about what he’s putting down in his call re-
                   ports, and if it’s thorough enough, and if it’s politically sensitized.
Walt recognized Luke’s expertise as a marketing rep, and he learned about Luke’s ex-
pertise not only by observing him and listening to him in staff meetings, but also by
reviewing Luke’s call reports.
     Every time Luke met with a client or a prospective client, he wrote a one-page
summary of that meeting. The primary audience for the call report was Walt, but the
report also went to other relevant personnel in the organization if the situation war-
ranted greater distribution. Through these call reports, and the discussions that Walt


 6 For example, if Luke had a discussion with a prospect about the need for a particular service, he would for-
ward a copy of the report to the manager of the group that could perform the service.
132   Chapter 3 =    Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          and Luke had about the call reports, Walt was able to recognize Luke’s rhetorical ex-
          pertise. That is, Walt could see Luke’s concern with audience (from the way he wrote
          the reports for diverse internal audiences) and purpose (from the information he pre-
          sented about his meetings with clients). Later in the same                            interview mentioned
          above, Walt gave even more details about what Luke wrote in his call reports and
          how those reports reflected an ideal marketing rep:
                   Walt:     He’s being very objective as he’s sitting there [with the client] . . . he’s
                                                                                                                     ’



                             not really forming an opinion one way or another on his own. . .
                             He’s not editorializing it, either. ... And he wasn’t defensive
                             about it.
          Walt knew that a good rep is a go-between, serving both client and employer, walk-
          ing a fine line between the needs of both. Luke’s reports reflected his ability to walk
          that line, to be “objective,” to avoid “forming an opinion,” to allow the client to
          speak through his report without “editorializing.” In this manner, his reports provided
          the kind of information that was most useful to Walt and others in the organization
          who used Luke’s reports to make decisions about the future of ECI.
                Once Luke had gained social authority, once he had been individuated as an ex-
          pert, his supervisor granted him some license in the content of the reports. For exam-
          ple, sometimes Luke’s reports were vague, but Walt did not ask for additional infor-
          mation. In one such report, Luke explained that a prospect was annoyed with EC]
          because of some misinformation. He went on to say that he would have to find out
          the source of the misinformation and report back to the prospect. He ended with the
          sentence, “I will follow up with an explanation and we will take it from there.” Walt’s
          response to this sentence was,
                Well, that’s a little unclear, what he’s going to take, but at this point, I’ve developed such
                a trusting relationship with Luke that I know he’ll do the right thing. At first, I would
                have sat down with him and said, “What do you mean? How are you going to take this
                and explain it more?” But now, just based on his actions, what he has done, it’s fine. So
                that | feel, I feel that [the report] is perfect.

                Others in the organization also gave Luke social authority: His colleagues in the
           marketing department listened to him with respect in meetings, managers and super-
           visors in other departments shared information with him and traveled with him to
           meet prospective clients, and other personnel contacted him for advice when they
           were asked to take on tasks for their own departments related to marketing.
                Perhaps the greatest evidence for Luke’s social authority is the very fact that he
           was still employed at ECI: Only three months after Luke joined ECI, the president
           began restructuring the organization and eliminating positions. Although marketing
           did not suffer in the first round of eliminations, it went from eight positions to five
           only a month later. A year later, two of those positions were eliminated and two were
           changed. Luke, the newest member of the marketing group, was the only person
           whose position had remained stable.’

             7 In the first round of cutbacks affecting the Marketing Group, one internal rep and one external rep were
           fired, and one external rep was transferred to a different department. In the second round of cutbacks, Walt
           (the director of marketing) and a second internal rep were fired; the regional rep was brought into the home of-
           fice and the last internal rep moved into a supervisory position over two new clerical positions.
                                  Katz   =   Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   133


     To a great extent, Luke developed social authority through the review of his call
reports. Although the ECI review process is not as multi-faceted as review at the
Agency, Luke’s reports were reviewed by his supervisor and other relevant personnel.
These reviews facilitated the development of social authority because:

     ¢ Each text existed within a very specific context defined by individuals within
       the organization and by the particular client discussed in the report. Luke’s re-
       ports demonstrated his understanding of context.
     * Call reports have a very specific purpose, and the review of Luke’s reports was,
       in part, an evaluation of Luke’s awareness of that purpose.
     ¢ The reviewers recognized that often Luke had a greater knowledge of the
       prospective client than they did, so they were willing to grant him a great deal
       of authority over specific texts.

Over time, as Luke continued to demonstrate his understanding of context and
awareness of the purpose of his reports, the authority granted to him over specific
texts contributed to a significant level of social authority within the organization.


Luke and Situational Authority

Unlike Darlene, who gained situational authority based on her unique expertise,
Luke gained situational authority by default. The president of ECI created a situation
where Luke was one of only two people who had the expertise to call on clients and
generate business for the firm. While the problem that Luke’s expertise can solve is
not new or temporary, he gained authority within the organization because of the
particular situation that existed at that time. Luke’s situational authority came from a
situation that was created internally, which was quite different from the Agency,
where the organization had the situation thrust upon them from outside. However,
the resulting opportunities for Darlene and Luke were very similar: They both could
use their expertise to help solve a problem caused by a particular situation. The origin
of the situation was not significant to that opportunity.
     When individuals gain authority, they can use that authority in many different
ways. The newcomers in this study often used their authority to challenge the status
quo and to attempt to effect change within the organization.


CHALLENGING THE STATUS QUO
As described earlier, nonacademic writing review takes place in a face-to-face setting,
focuses on a particular text, and exists to produce the best possible document for a
particular audience and need. These aspects of writing review encourage newcomers
to ask questions and test the limits of accepted conventions.
     Questioning and testing are recognized strategies for socialization to the organi-
zation’s conventions, but they can also be seen as attempts to individualize or chal-
lenge the status quo. That is, if the questioning and testing serve to enhance the new-
comer’s understanding of conventions and lead to conformity, then they have served
a socializing purpose. If, on the other hand, the questioning and testing result in “cre-
ative individualism”—the rejection of some, but not all, conventions or behaviors
134   Chapter 3 #8 Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           (Van Maanen, 1976, p. 109)—then they have served an individualizing purpose. The
           extent to which this creative individualism is accepted by the organization depends
           on how the newcomer has been individuated: If the newcomer has gained some level
           of social or situational authority in the area of the challenge, the organization is more
           likely to pay attention to and accept the challenge to conventions or behaviors.

           Darlene’s Challenges
           Even before Darlene assumed her role as editor, she felt comfortable challenging a re-
           port that had been written by Rebecca and Will (an AIC who had recently left the
           Agency) and revised by Gene. Since Darlene had no official involvement with this
           report, | asked Gene why he had given it to her to read. He told me that he was trying
           to help prepare her for the role of editor that she would be likely to assume at some
           point in the future. He further told me that he wanted Darlene to read the report so
           she would see the kinds of decisions he made and to give her an opportunity to tell
           him how she would have decided what to include.
                This review session was atypical for two reasons: Darlene had not written any
           portion of the document in question and her comments were unlikely to have any ef-
           fect on the final version. However, she took advantage of the opportunity provided
           by Gene to read the report carefully. After she had read the report she:

               ¢ asked about certain wording that seemed “redundant” and “doesn’t seem like
                 the normal way to do an audit,”
               ® suggested that two paragraphs could have been combined,
               ® pointed out the need for some specific information,
                 said that there was insufficient evidence for the findings, and
               ¢ commented on the lack of attention to audience needs.
           In each instance, Gene defended his decision and explained why her choice would be
           less appropriate. Darlene did not sit quietly and accept his explanations in all cases.
           For example, she felt strongly about the lack of evidence provided in the report. They
           discussed the reasons behind the paucity of evidence:
               Gene says he would prefer to disclose everything, but there is a benefit to this system. By
               not disclosing, it gives you ammunition to go back with if [the providers] disagree.
               Darlene suggests that it’s not fair, not right, to hold anything back. Gene says the auditee
               has several opportunities to ask questions or raise issues, so it’s not unfair. Darlene says it’s
               sneaky.

           They continued this discussion for several minutes, with Darlene refusing to ac-
           knowledge the validity of Gene’s explanation. In the end, “Gene tells her she is
           right,” but then he “explains that this provider is a good one, if it were a bad one they
           might handle things differently.” In other words, Gene was explaining how context
           (the difference between a “good provider” and a “bad one” as the subject of the audit)
           influences text.
                Darlene’s strong sense of personal authority and Gene’s willingness to share au-
           thority over the text by allowing her to question and challenge him created a situation
                                   Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   135


where she could learn about the conventions of the organization, express her opinions
about those conventions, and display her expertise as a thoughtful, careful, rhetori-
cally skilled writer. Although in this instance Gene did not change the report based
on Darlene’s comments, in many cases, particularly after Darlene assumed her role as
editor, he and others did accept and act on her suggestions. Her influence on the re-
ports was most obvious in the area of visual presentation, but she also challenged the
word choices and phrasings that had become traditional in the organization.
     Darlene’s use of visual aids to present information may have been connected to
her experience using computers. She was more comfortable with computers and more
knowledgeable about the variety of features offered by computer software than many
of her more senior colleagues. She enjoyed experimenting with the various tools that
the computer offers and liked to incorporate visually appealing and effective com-
puter-generated tables, charts, graphs, and bulleted lists as well as highlighted head-
ings and dramatic borders. When she began writing and editing reports, she reduced
the amount of narrative by incorporating graphic elements into the text. These chal-
lenges to the conventional presentation were supported by her supervisors. In his re-
view of the first report that Darlene wrote, Gene commented on her use of charts:
        Gene:   Now we have our spiffy productivity chart.
     Darlene:   Is that all right? You didn’t have any questions?
        Gene:   Peachy!
     Darlene:   I though maybe we would make it smaller, for the actual report. |
                mean, we thought it was kind of big. Didn’t you think. . . ?
       Gene:    Yeeaahh. I mean, if you can cut it back to a half page, without los-
                ing... I just don’t know, if it would translate down well, but if you
                can cut that down to half page, great. And if you can’t, it’s no big
                deal.
     Although the managers accepted her challenge to the traditional narrative pre-
sentation of material, they were not as willing to accept some of the atypical word
choices she tried to inject into the reports. The following examples describe some of
the changes that supervisors made to Darlene’s texts. While the changes may not
seem significant when viewed out of context, within the context of the Agency’s au-
dit reports they demonstrate Darlene’s intentional and explicit challenge to what she
saw as boring reports:
      “in years to come,” was replaced with “in the future”
    © “services were deemed uncollectible” was changed to “services were uncol-
      lectible”
    ° “The effect of... cannot be understated” was changed to “The effect of . . . is
      critical”
    * “still more dismal” was changed to “not good”
In review sessions, Darlene frequently argued for her word choices, but she often lost
those arguments. As Gene explained, his decisions to change some of her words were
based on whether or not she was using “audit words or nonaudit words. ‘Privy to,’
that’s not the kind of thing we say. So I blipped it out of there.”
136   Chapter 3 =   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



              Gene was even more explicit about Darlene’s use of language on another occa-
          sion, prior to Darlene moving into the editor role. As previously described, Gene had
          offered her the opportunity to review a report (written by Rebecca and Will) that he
          had just finished revising. She commented on an unusual word—“disaffiliation”—
          that he had used, and Gene responded by laughing and saying he was surprised that
          she would comment on an unusual word:

              They talk about Darlene’s word choices: Gene says that she uses interesting words, too.
              She says there are times when they won’t let her use the words she wants. Like, she said
              the records had “vanished” in one report, and they made her change that because it
              wasn’t an “accounting word.” She thinks it makes reports more interesting to read if you
              use different words than the ones that are expected. Gene agrees, but says the interesting
              words don’t usually make it through the system.

               While the supervisors seemed willing, even eager to accept her challenge to the
          visual presentation, they seemed more conservative when it came to their language
          conventions: Their reasons for not letting her use “nonaudit” words were usually
          some variation of Gene’s “that’s not the kind of thing we say.” In other words, the su-
          pervisors seemed to think that they had a better understanding than Darlene of what
          constituted the best possible document with regard to word choice. Their reliance on
          traditional or standard words and phrases reflected a sense of what was appropriate
          and acceptable within a particular discipline, a sense that they had a better under-
          standing of context than Darlene.


          Luke’s Challenges
          The personal authority that Luke brought with him to ECI and the social authority
          that he gained, in part, through writing review, gave him the freedom to challenge
          some aspects of his job. Luke’s challenges had little direct impact on others in the or-
          ganization; they pertained to the way he performed his tasks but did not significantly
          alter the way he interacted with others in the organization or the way that others per-
          formed their own tasks. For example, Luke rejected the form he thought he was sup-
          posed to use for his call reports. In my first meeting with Luke, he told me about the
          kind of writing he would be doing.
               He showed me a copy of how they do call reports here—in columns, like conversation
               analysis. He doesn’t like [the form], and showed me examples of his call reports (he has
               only done three so far). He writes across the page, ignoring the column lines. No one has
               complained about the way he writes up call reports. Everyone else does the script style
               report. He would prefer to summarize the total conversation than “quote” each party to
               the call.

           Although Luke felt comfortable challenging the use of this form, in fact, he had mis-
           understood. The form that he had showed me, the “script” form, was used to record
           telephone conversations as they occurred; “call reports,” records of meetings with
           clients, were filed on another, more complex form, with spaces for different types of
           narrative summaries to be completed after the visit. Although Luke quickly learned
                                    Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation      137


about his mistake, he never accepted the use of the script style form and continued to
record his telephone conversations in summary style.
     Another of Luke’s challenges focused on the way he gathered information about
prospects and clients. Luke had complained to me on several occasions about the dif-
ficulty he had finding out about ECT’s history with clients. In one of our early sessions,
Luke:

    closes the door and tells me that the company does a lousy job of documentation. That is,
    there is no central database with information about the history of the company’s relation-
    ships with any other company. When he calls on someone, he would like to know
    whether or not they have ever done previous work, when someone last called on them,
    what the experience was like, etc. There is no way to get all that information.

Seven weeks later, Luke had found a way to get the information. During one of our
observation sessions, I noticed Luke referring to a large orange binder before he made
each phone cal!. | asked him to tell me about the binder:
    Luke explains that this is a list of all clients that the organization has ever dealt with. It
    includes information on work done, proposals (whether accepted or rejected), contact,
    address, phone, date of last official contact, etc... . Luke had not known of the binder’s
    existence—the binder is an accounting tool. Luke asked for and was given his own set—
    two volumes, each about 4" thick. . . . Now he always looks up prospects in the binder be-
    fore calling.

Luke’s challenge here was to the process by which the marketing representatives cre-
ated and maintained relationships with prospects and clients. When the tools at his
disposal in marketing proved insufficient for his needs, he had the authority to go
outside the department to find other materials that would more adequately meet
those needs. Although Luke found this database extremely useful, he had not consid-
ered suggesting that others use it as well:

    I asked if he has shared this information with the marketing group. He says he has not
    talked about it in a meeting, but thinks maybe he should. . . . Luke says he will talk about
    use of these tools in a meeting some time, just so everyone is aware of what he is doing,
    how he is using them.

Until I asked Luke if he had shared the database with others, it had not occurred to
him to do so. While he had challenged the process and individualized it for himself,
he had not tried to extend his influence to the other marketing representatives.
    Darlene and Luke demonstrated many instances of challenging their organiza-
tions, and both of them seemed concerned with finding “better” ways of performing
their tasks. Some newcomers,        however, even newcomers          with authority, seem to
avoid any explicit challenge to their organizations.

Rebecca's Lack of Challenge

Rebecca had considerable personal and social authority and was recognized by the
Agency as a remarkably adept auditor. As noted previously, she was nominated for
Employee of the Year based primarily on her technical (auditing and computing)
138   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


           skills.8 Rebecca demonstrated a high level of self confidence at all times. In our first
           interview:

                 e She commented on the ineffectiveness of the Agency’s orientation program:
                   “They gave me a bunch of stuff to read—useless stuff. [In the future] they
                   should just send [new people] out into the field.”
                 ¢ She told me about her first assignment: “It was very simple, very straightfor-
                   ward. | did a lot of the writing because it was so simple.”
                 e When I asked her how she knew what to write in her first assignment, she said:
                   “T don’t pay attention to how the others write, I just write my own way and so
                   far they’ve told me it was good.”

           Throughout that interview and all subsequent observations, Rebecca displayed a con-
           fidence in her own ability and a lack of respect for the abilities of many of her super-
           visors that bordered on arrogance. Toward the end of my observations, I conducted a
           discourse-based interview with Rebecca in which I asked her to choose between two
           versions of a number of “findings.”? One version of each finding was taken from an
           actual report and the second was a version that I had rewritten, but I did not indicate
           which version was the authentic one. Her responses reflected her attitude toward the
           word done by others:

                 ¢ In response to a finding about the lack of signatures on Board minutes: “I think
                   those are silly findings. (Laughter.) |mean, who cares? They didn’t sign it, they
                   should have, that’s it.”
                 e In response to a finding about claims for interest expenses: “I don’t like either
                   of these, because the interest expenses are not allowable, not because of [the
                   reason stated in the findings], but because you can’t claim interest. It’s against
                   the law. An interest expense would never be eligible for reimbursement.”

           Rebecca was so adamant about her answer that claiming interest was against the law
           that I later rechecked the finding with one of the managers.!° He said that there are
           certain situations where interest can be claimed, so Rebecca’s confidence in her
           knowledge was somewhat misplaced in this instance.
                Despite, or perhaps because of, her independent attitude, the organization per-
           ceives her to be extremely capable. Although she was never singled out as an excep-
           tional writer, her writing skills were regarded as more than adequate, and she was
           asked to take on AIC work long before she was eligible for that role according to civil
           service classifications. In fact, she was so highly thought of that Gene once told me
           that “if we had a few teams like Rebecca and Darlene [who had worked together on a

           8 Although Rebecca lost the Employee of the Year award to Darlene, she did earn this recognition the follow-
           ing year.
            ° A “finding” is a statement of a problem or issue that was uncovered during an audit. An audit report is actu-
           ally a report that lists all the findings and provides the background (evidence) and recommendations for the
           resolution of each problem.
           !0 | had done a pretest of the discourse-based interview with a manager to gain the perspective of an experi-
           enced member of the organization as a check against the responses of the newcomers. In that pretest, the man-
           ager had not indicated that the interest finding was faulty in any way.
                                   Katz   = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   139


recent audit], we could do dozens of meaningful audits every year and save the state
millions of dollars.”
     Although Rebecca    had both personal and social authority, she did not use that
authority to challenge the organization and she did not gain any situational author-
ity: Her expertise was not seen as relevant to solving the problem of the protracted
report production process. Further, | did not observe her asking questions, making
suggestions, or in any way attempting to influence the work processes of those around
her. The only obvious outcome of her authority was increased responsibility in the
workplace and the possibility of accelerated advancement.
     {t seemed that Rebecca was unconcerned with attempting to challenge the orga-
nization. She did not significantly influence her organization because she was not in-
terested in acting as an agent for change, and we cannot predict how successful she
would have been if she had chosen otherwise. While Luke challenged those aspects
of the organization that affected his ability to perform his tasks, he seemed content to
let others in the organization continue working as they had in the past. Darlene,
however, was concerned with changing processes enacted by everyone in the Agency.



BECOMING AGENTS FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
Although it is difficult to establish causality, there are situations that seem to indicate
that newcomers do, on occasion, push their challenges beyond their own sphere.
That is, some newcomers challenge aspects of the organization beyond their own role
and attempt to change the organization.


Darlene’s Attempts at Change
When Darlene was made editor for the Agency, she moved into a position where she
could use her authority to make meaningful changes in the organization.
Significantly, she also moved into a situation where she was involved in writing re-
view sessions on an almost daily basis. The increased participation in writing review
processes—both as a writer and as a reviewer—may have increased her authority and
provided the catalyst for her involvement in organizational change. At the very least,
her increased participation provided additional opportunities to display her skills,
question conventions, and attempt to change the organization.
     The first, and perhaps most predictable, change was in the format and language
of the audit reports. As would be expected when one individual is responsible for
editing all documents, the reports became more consistent and language began to be
standardized.
     To facilitate her revision process, Darlene created a list of tips for “Improving
Report Writing Efforts.” She began this list when she assumed the role as editor in an
attempt to resolve what she and some of her colleagues saw as inconsistencies in the
director’s attention, and “he said I should write things down that he prefers, and then
hold him to it.” Over the first few weeks in her new role, she added items to the list
following review sessions with various managers. The list consisted of information in
five categories: General Format; Findings, Background, and Recommendations             (au-
140   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           diting terms referring to specific sections of audit reports); and Wording Choices.!!
           Eventually, Darlene would have several pages of “tips’—now formalized as
           “Guidelines for Report Writing’—which she would distribute to everyone involved
           in writing reports with a cover memo that began, “Attached are guidelines to be fol-
           lowed when preparing our audit reports” (emphasis added).
                In addition to attempting to standardize language and format, Darlene suggested
           a change in the very process by which the reports were drafted, a change that dramat-
           ically reduced the amount of time involved in producing a report. Figure 1 describes
           the report writing process prior to the creation of the editor position. This process
           shows the report being drafted by the AIC (usually within one week of the comple-
           tion of an audit), and then moving on to the manager for review. The report would
           cycle between the AIC and the manager until the manager was satisfied with the
           document, and then it would be sent up one level in the hierarchy to an associate di-
           rector. The report would then cycle between the manager and the associate director,
           be sent on to the director, cycle again, and finally be distributed. While the chart de-
           scribes the movement of the document, it does not give an adequate indication of the
           amount of time that this complex process could take. A typical audit might take
           three to four months; the production of the report for that audit could take anywhere
           from six months to two years.
               When Darlene became editor, it was necessary to change this process to allow for
           her role. Figure 2 shows the process that Darlene proposed and which, in fact, was ac-
           cepted by the organization. In this streamlined process, the number of cycles was dra-
           matically reduced. Although all of the same people participated in the process, their
           review of the document was much more efficient.
                One of the major reasons for this efficiency was that Darlene’s revised process
           called for a meeting between the manager, AIC, and editor before writing began. In
           this meeting, they discussed the content, order of findings, and general tone of the re-
           port. Also in this meeting, Darlene reminded the AIC of the “Guidelines for Report
           Writing” that she had produced and distributed. This planning meeting dramatically
           improved the quality of the initial draft produced by the AIC. Furthermore, by hav-
           ing the manager and editor review the document simultaneously and meet to discuss
           their independent reviews, and by having the editor make the actual changes, the
           number of cycles and the time spent on the revision process was reduced significantly.
                Ideally, this new process produced an audit report in about a month. Initially,
           however, the reports were still taking several months to complete. Darlene suggested
           an additional change which resulted in a considerable revision of the role of the man-
           agers in the audit process. The suggestion was instigated by Darlene’s observations at
           the prewriting meetings.
                The prewriting meeting was one of the most important innovations in Darlene’s
           report writing process. While sitting in on these sessions, Darlene realized that quite



           ‘Items in the list varied from the simple “Define all acronyms and technical terms used,” to the more complex
           “Make sure the recommendation addresses all points raised in the finding and background sections, and that no
           new issues are introduced.” The first version consisted of 26 items, the second version had 46, and the final ver-
           sion had 64.
                                    Katz      = Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   141


     AIC drafts report and delivers to manager for review.


     Manager reviews draft and returns                   AIC revises draft and returns to
     to AIC for revision.                                manager.



     Manager completes revision of draft and delivers to associate director.



     Associate director reviews draft and                Manager revises draft and returns to
     returns te manager for revision.                    associate director.



     Associate director completes revision of draft and delivers to director.



     Director reviews draft and returns                  Associate director revises draft and
     to associate director for revision.                 returns to director.



     Director makes final revisions and distributes report.


   Figure 1. Report writing process at the agency.




  Manager, AIC, and editor meet before report is written. Associate director may participate.



                                           AIC drafts report.



  Manager and editor independently review initial draft, consult with AIC, and meet to agree
  upon any changes. Editor makes changes.



  Manager, AIC, and editor meet to review edits and make any additional changes. Editor
  makes changes and forwards draft to associate director.

Ae                       Weare
                           Sie WE hy
  Associate director reviews draft, makes any necessary changes, and forwards to director.



 Director reviews draft, makes any necessary changes, and issues report.

Figure 2. Report writing process instituted by Darlene.
142   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action




                                                                     Manager makes periodic visits to site to
            AIC and staff auditor conduct audit on site.                        check on progress.



           Figure 3. Original audit process.



                               Manager works side-by-side with AIC and staff auditor on site.


           Figure 4. Revised audit process.



           frequently the manager would ask for information or evidence that the AIC would not
           be able to provide. In these cases, the manager would send the AIC back to the audit
           site to gather more material. When this occurred, it would halt the progress of the re-
           port, often for several weeks. Darlene suggested that if the manager were more in-
           volved in the audit process itself, these questions would be answered while the AIC
           was still on site, eliminating the need for return visits. This suggestion was put in prac-
           tice, and thus Darlene changed the audit process that had been in use for decades.
           Figures 3 and 4 describe a simplified version of the original and revised processes.
                In effect, this revision to the audit process changed the job description of the
           managers: They no longer supervised from a distance, but instead supervised as part
           of the audit team on site. The significance of this change is greater than it may seem:
           The managers, all of whom had grown accustomed to working a typical eight-hour
           day in a typical office setting, were now required to travel throughout the state on a
           regular basis. They frequently had to spend several days each week working in bor-
           rowed offices dealing with frightened or hostile providers. They frequently had to stay
           in hotels and eat in restaurants for extended periods of time, returning to their homes
           and families only on the weekends. While traveling was an accepted aspect of the job
           for the AlCs and staff auditors, one of the benefits of becoming a manager had always
           been that managers didn’t have to travel. By rewriting the managers’ job description,
           Darlene took away one of the most envied and enjoyed benefits of the job.
                Darlene’s level of authority and impact on the agency are dramatic. However,
           this does not mean than all newcomers with authority—even those who are inter-
           ested in challenging and changing their organizations—will be successful in their at-
           tempts to foster change.

           Peter’s Unsuccessful Attempts at Change

           Peter had a sense of personal authority based on his previous experience as an archi-
           tect and as an architectural software specialist. He also gained confidence from his per-
           ception of the organization’s need for his expertise. Peter was hired because of his
           unique experience (not many architects were as knowledgeable as Peter about soft-
           ware systems), and he was initially granted social authority based on his employer’s
           recognition of the expertise gained through that experience. In fact, Peter was explic-
           itly hired to be an agent for organizational change: ECI planned to upgrade their inter-
           nal computer systems, and they were counting on Peter to assist in this major project.
                                  Katz   * Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   143


     In one of his initial assignments, Peter was asked to help draft a “strategic plan”
that would allow ECI “to become the foremost EA [Engineering and Architecture]
firm in the area with regard to state-of-the-art technical expertise.” Peter spent a
great deal of time on this document, which was reviewed by individuals at many lev-
els of the firm. Eight months after the drafting of the plan my notes show that

    I asked what happened to the strategic plans that each group had to write. Peter says he
    doesn’t think anything was done with them. He thinks the problem came because each
    department did its own plans, but no one had the ability to produce a unified plan from
    all the different pieces.

Peter’s frustration at his inability to effect change was, by this time, causing him to
think about changing jobs or possibly going back to school for an MBA. He felt that
the firm’s inability to make good decisions stemmed from a president who was “an en-
gineer first and a businessman second—and not a very good businessman at that.”
     Peter’s cynicism about the organization developed gradually, and can be seen as
stemming from an organizational conflict over espoused goals and values and the ac-
tual goals and values adhered to by most of his colleagues. The new president (he be-
came president just a few months before Peter was hired) had a vision for the organi-
zation, a vision that he hoped would become reality through the creation and
enactment of the strategic plans. To carry out this goal, the president had frequent
meetings where he espoused a “new direction” and several times announced a re-
structuring of the organization.
     The restructuring was not well received by many of the employees. As Kurt, the
marketing representative for the architecture group, told me, “The groups have, for
the most part, not been happy with the new restructuring—there is a lot of resis-
tance. The primary cause of resistance is the refusal to admit that they [the units
merged with other work groups] were weak units.”
      Peter, however, embraced the restructuring. He told Kurt that he interpreted the
president’s actions as an opportunity to work together and make [the new group
formed by the merger of four units: architecture and structural, mechanical, and elec-
trical engineering] a strong group. Peter further saw himself as central to the new di-
rection of the group: “Peter told Kurt that the president referred several times to the
approach that he, Peter, has been taking—joint venture projects to help build the ex-
pertise and portfolio of the group.”
      Although Peter had been hired for his computer skills, the president had recog-
nized his experience in “joint venture projects,” particularly within the health care
field. The president saw Peter’s expertise as useful in the fulfillment of his plans for
the organization.
      Peter’s sense of personal authority and his awareness of the social authority being
granted to him for his expertise in these areas was frequently reinforced. For example,
Marge told Peter that she wanted him to attend a conference on architecture for the
health care industry that would be held in Florida in February. “She says that the
president’s approval [for Peter to attend the conference] is one more sign that he is
behind their decision to specialize in this area [health care] and that he really is sup-
portive of the architecture unit.” Peter did attend the conference, and he came back
optimistically full of ideas to help the firm move in the new direction.
144   Chapter 3 ®    Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



               Although Marge seemed to be supporting the president’s plan, Kurt told Peter
          that Marge was “the biggest problem,” the personin the unit who would keep the plan
          from working. The conflict between Marge’s view of the organization and Peter’s view
          provide an example of what Van Maanen (1976) calls “inefficacious socialization” (p.
          107): Peter was not being effectively socialized to the values and goals of the organiza-
          tion because there were two sets, one espoused by the president and one held by the
          oldtimers. A theoretical note from the third month of my observation of Peter says:

                One of the few things that still marks Peter as a newcomer is his acceptance of the re-
                structuring. He sees it as a positive step and is embracing it wholeheartedly. People who
                have been with the firm longer are skeptical at best, fearful at worst... . It will be inter-
                esting to see if Peter is able to share his enthusiasm for the upcoming challenge with oth-
                ers in the group.

          In fact, what happened was that the skeptics refused to work toward the new direc-
          tion imposed by the president, making Peter the outsider within his workgroup.
               Peter behaved according to what he perceived to be the goals of the organization;
          his manager and those around him continued to behave in accordance with the “old”
          goals. This became strikingly clear in the discourse-based interviews | conducted with
          Peter and others in the organization. These interviews were based on four different
          types of documents drafted by Peter: call reports, job reports, client letters, and a
          client proposal. I conducted identical interviews with Peter and Marge and, since
          proposals are typically written by the marketing group, | also conducted the proposal
          portion of the interview with Walt, the director of marketing. The results of these in-
          terviews paint a disturbing, but enlightening, picture. I asked each participant to ex-
          plain the significance of the differences between sentences written by Peter and sen-
          tences taken from the boilerplate proposal Peter had used as a model for his
          document. While I did not identify the source of any of the sentences during the in-
          terviews, Peter immediately recognized his own text. Marge and Walt did not know
          which sentences had been written by Peter.

                ¢ Both Marge and Walt actually preferred the boilerplate. And since they saw it
                  as “better,” they both assumed it had been written by Peter.
                ¢ Marge and Walt said the preferred version was “more professional”; Peter said,
                  “The significance here is that the company had gone through a reorganization
                    since the boilerplate was written, and it was important to reflect the new orga-
                    nization of the company.”

           Marge and Walt were continuing to do business as usual; Peter was trying to write to
           match the new direction of the organization.
                Similarly, in the other sections of this interview, Marge and Peter disagreed about
           the necessity of including specific words or phrases in nine cases out of 14 that I had
           highlighted.!? With this level of disagreement, it is not surprising that Peter grew frus-

           '2 Specifically, of the 14 highlighted passages, Marge said seven were unnecessary; Peter said only three were
           unnecessary. Since the documents were written by Peter, it is probably understandable that he would say that
           most of the items were necessary. However, of the three passages that Peter said were unnecessary, Marge said
           two were necessary.
                                    Katz   ® Writing Review as an Opportunity for Individuation   145


trated. As noted above, he became disillusioned with the president’s ability to make
the plan work. The organization never took advantage of the computer expertise they
hired him for, his manager never fully supported the joint-venture projects he wanted
to pursue, and, within a year of joining ECI, he had left the firm for another job.
                               $

THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUATION
Individuation emphasizes the newcomers’ characteristics that dominate their role
within the organization, and sometimes the results are exactly what the organization
would anticipate: As expected, Luke became recognized as an expert marketing rep
and Rebecca became recognized as an expert auditor. However, the way a person will
be individuated cannot always be predicted: Darlene was individuated as an expert
writer, even though she was hired as an auditor. Peter was individuated as someone
swimming against the stream, even though he had been hired as an architect and a
computer specialist who could lead them in a new direction. The other two newcom-
ers who participated in this study, Katy and John, did not individuate as quickly as
the others.
     Although I cannot say with certainty why this is so, | would suggest that both
Katy and John were less secure—had less personal authority—and thus were less
likely to take advantage of opportunities to demonstrate their abilities or challenge
their organization than any of the other newcomers in this study. Their lack of per-
sonal authority may be attributed to their lack of experience and skill in both the
“domain content space” (Katy had only four months previous experience working in
the field of auditing, John had none) and the “rhetorical process space” (Geisler,
1994). Katy and John were not perceived by the supervisors at the Agency as being
particularly skilled writers, a perception that was fostered in the writing review ses-
sions of their work. In those sessions, not only did their writing require significant re-
vision, but the supervisors also noted that neither of these newcomers questioned the
changes to their writing, defended their text, expressed opinions about what they had
written or about their supervisor’s suggestions, or offered their own suggestions for re-
vision. Neither Katy nor John was individuated as rhetorically skilled; in fact, neither
of therm demonstrated any unique characteristics that were valued by the supervisors
at the Agency.
     The way in which people are individuated has significant consequences for their
careers as well as for the organizations where they work. However, individuation has
not been examined previously from either a personal or organizational point of view.
By examining the opportunities for individuation that exist within the writing review
process, I hope that I have begun a conversation that will help prepare people to rec-
ognize opportunities to question, challenge, and change their organizations.

DEVELOPING        YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. Identify two of the key features from Darlene's and Luke's organizational contexts that
     helped them gain organizational authority and explain how these features assisted them
     in doing so.
  2. Katz refers several times to “review,” the “review process,” or “nonacademic writing re-
    view.” Describe the review process and its functions, referring to the Darlene and Luke ex-
    amples to illustrate your description.
146   Chapter 3 ® Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


             3. Of the three kinds of authority outlined by Katz, identify which you believe students are
                most capable of developing while in school, and which are more dependent on specific
                workplace contexts and/or experiences. Explain why you believe so. Finally, propose how
                students can build even the more workplace-dependent authorities while still in school,
                and develop a personal plan for doing so, according to your particular writing career
                interests.
             4. Identify and illustrate the communication strategies, interpersonal and otherwise, that
                most helped the subjects in Katz's study become individuated. Refer to several specific
                examples to support your argument.
             5. Evaluate who—Darlene or Luke—you believe gains the most authority within her or his
                organization. Be sure to clearly define authority and to support your assessment with spe-
                cific examples.


              FOCUSING           ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. orality
              2. literacy
              3. target readers
              4. intermediary readers
              5. multiple audiences
              6. task representation
              7. strategy of isolation



              oe. AND iets                                               IN THE AMorkennen
              PROCESS- AND                         TEXT-BASED                           STRATEGIES FOR
             M ULTIPLE-A UDIENCE ADAPTATION
                                                           re   seose         SK   EK   OTHER   EHH   THE   HHRAHT HK   ORS   TH   EH   E KEE   HREHA   EE


             RACHEL SPILKA
              University of Maine




          Source: Spilka, Rachel. “Orality and Literacy in the Workplace: Process- and Text-Based Strategies for Multiple-Audience
          Adaptation. Journal of Business and Technical Communication 4 (1990), pp. 44-67. Copyright © by Sage Publications, Inc.
          Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc.
                                                  Spilka   = Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   147


i          ——            a                nemeemees emeabaae                            eee
    In recent years, a growing number of theorists have speculated that, in order to
communicate effectively in a nonacademic settin

  orrespondingly, more technical-communication researchers have been focusing
their attention on how professionals in the workplace apply this social knowledge
both to private composing decisions and to public interaction with such influences as
collaborators, reviewers, clients, and users (Doheny-Farina, “Writing in an Emerging
Organization”; Odell and Goswami; Paradis, et al.; Selzer; Spilka).
    The advent of these theoretical and empirical probes signals a critical phase in
the evolution of technical communication: At this time,                                     Z
caren caceman sail ever before are joining rhetoricians in fi                              n,
not only on the      composi             iters, but also

In particular, they are demonstrating that,

(Dohney-Farina,         riting in an   Emerging       Organization”; Odell and Goswami;
Paradis, et al.; Selzer; Spilka).
     Yet, how much is really known about the role of interaction, or more generally
orality, in the production of documents in the workplace? For example, exactly how
do nonacademic writers benefit from interacting with others during invention? To
what extent and in what ways does interaction influence writers, readers, and other
project participants as a document evolves? How does the role of orality compare to
that of literacy in the fulfillment of rhetorical goals in the workplace? I use orality to
refer to the process of transmitting ideas via any conversation or message between
project participants that involves speech (e.g., conversation in person or on the
phone) or via written forms resembling speech (e.g., electronic mail, written notes
sent between writers and readers, or comments        written in margins). Literacy refers to
the process of transmitting ideas via any written materials used primarily in isolation
rather than for conversational purposes—materials such as preliminary drafts, final
products, source documents, outlines, and planning notes used by writers while work-
ing on subsequent drafts.
     In a naturalistic study completed in spring 1988, I used converging, qualitative
measures to examine how seven engineers in two diversions of a large corporation
adapt discourse to multiple audiences. In this study, I explored two questions in some
depth:




While analyzing patterns emerging from this study, I discovered that, in the five more
successful rhetorical situations observed, orality played at least four significant roles
in the writers’ composing processes:

      Orly was
    | rhetoricall    the conral  means  of  analyzing mule    audiences
                                                                  with
                                                                        .Th srand
                                                                       readers
                  y successful writers were  those who interacted
148   Chapter 3   =    Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



                      other project participants throughout the composing process to update,
                      revise, and make more accurate their initial impressions about their rhetor-
                      ical situations (including audience needs, orientations, and preferences)
                      and to expand their knowledge of social contexts characterizing these sit-
                      uations.
                      Orality   was   the   cen                C    ni               liences.   In the
                      morePemanate miecesrat situations, the writers intend with readers
                      throughout the composing process to negotiate toward a consensus about
                      rhetorical decisions (e.   poses and content) affecting the document in
                      progress.   Writer/reade     ction  becam        riters’ ce        ”1s

                                     e     ral means of fulfillin  ric      1     the more suc-
                       essful cases, interacting with eaaaae ‘neuen the composing process
                      was the primary way writers detected incompatible or conflicting percep-
                      tions or goals between themselves and readers and among audience seg-
                      ments. With this social knowledge, the writers then interacted further
                      with readers to resolve incompatibilities and conflicts and to respond to
                      those questions and concerns that mattered most to those readers.
                      Interaction was more powerful than drafts in allowing writers to achieve
                      compromises and fulfill rhetorica

                                     |                  ng    inte      ce    ieve a corporate con-
                      sensus concerning a gcaniens purposes, contents, and other rhetorical fea-
                      tures, the writers helped their corporation fulfill social goals, such as
                      encouraging collaboration and working toward compromise. Simul-
                      taneously, these writers also assisted the corporation in developing and sus-
                      taining its unique cultural values, conventions, and taboos.
                This article will discuss these roles of orality in detail. In doing so, some salient
           process-based and text-based strategies effective for multiple-audience analysis and
           adaptation will be introduced, along with a model for audience adaptation that tech-
           nical-communication specialists might find useful in their own explorations of the
           roles of orality in nonacademic writing or in classroom instruction. In addition, the
           article will analyze how the oral culture observed at this corporation reinforces
           Bitzer’s theory of public knowledge, in which he speculates that orality, in the form of
           continuous interaction, is essential in initiating newcomers into an established com-
           munity and in aiding a community in the growth and continuation of its culture.


           THE STUDY’S SETTINGS AND METHODOLOGY
           This study was conducted in two divisions of Forbes Electric (all names used in this
           article are fictitious), a large northeastern corporation. So that conditions could be
           optimized for detecting significant cultural and social differences that might affect
           composing behavior, the study was conducted in divisions with radically different
           functions. At one division, most engineers conceptualize and communicate              ideas.
           Here, the engineers invent more efficient processes and then train other employees
                                              Spilka   ® Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   149


throughout the corporation in the use of these processes. In contrast, the second divi-
sion has a “line” or production function. Here, most engineers are busy producing
nonnuclear energy products.
    Also in order that detection of interesting cultural and social differences could be
optimized, case studies were conducted of six writers, three in each of the two divi-
sions, as they worked on single documents aimed at multiple audiences. (Later on,
one of the six writers handed over his project to another engineer, who became the
seventh subject of the study.) The subjects selected were all engineers who had the
time to meet with the researcher, were willing to participate in the study and help in
data collection, and were scheduled during the next half-year to be the primary writ-
ers of documents aimed at multiple audiences. The six documents focused upon were
a tutorial, monthly report, operations manual, business plan, recommendation report,
and business-unit newsletter.
     For each case study, I used methodological triangulation for data collection.
Using a variety of research measures was a way, first, of approaching each rhetorical
situation from multiple perspectives, which was necessary to compensate for the
weaknesses of each research measure used in the study; and, second, of detecting sig-
nificant patterns occurring within each case study, as well as across several or all of
the case studies conducted.
     So that the influence of orality on the subjects’ composing behavior could be
more fully appreciated, the engineers were observed throughout the composing
process. This study, therefore, supplemented the traditional pre- and postcomposing
process measures (i.e., surveys and interviews) with a group of process measures that
had potential to allow for close observations of the engineers during invention. In
each of the case studies, I used as many research measures in the following phases as
the engineer and division sponsor would allow and as many as would help me detect
patterns that would lead to answers for my research questions.

Phase I: Preliminary Observations and Data Collection
In this phase, traditional precomposing process measures—surveys and interviews—
were used to gather initial data about the engineers and their environments. First,
surveys were conducted of the professionals and managers at each of the two divi-
sions, to gather information about their social and rhetorical environments. Open-
ended interviews were then conducted with the subjects to learn about their commu-
nication histories, composing behaviors, perceptions of and attitudes toward readers,
and predictions about their current rhetorical situations. In addition, as many docu-
ments as possible were collected. These documents were ones that the subjects had
written in their current or previous jobs at the corporation.
     Discourse-based interviews concerning these documents were also conducted. In
these interviews, writers were asked about specific composing decisions they had
made in texts, such as why they had phrased sentences in certain ways, selected cer-
tain words, or chosen particular details. Typically, writers were asked about different
choices they could have made at particular junctures of the texts. In the discourse-
based interviews conducted in this study, special attention was paid to how compos-
ing decisions might have been influenced by social constraints.
150   Chapter 3 ®   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          Phase II: Observations of the Writers at Work

          In this phase, the writers were observed performing normal job responsibilities at
          work. At the first division, two mornings and two afternoons were spent observing
          any interaction the writers had with other people. At the second division, I was not
          allowed to spend a complete morning or afternoon at the site and compensated for
          this difficulty by training each writer’s secretary to be a research assistant who would
          record the information needed.

          Phase III: Observations of the Writers’ Composing Processes
          Phase III involved using the following process measures to observe the writers’ com-
          posing processes as they worked on their documents:
                attending as many informal and formal meetings as possible between each
                writer and project participants, and, soon afterwards, conducting open-ended
                interviews of all participants about what had happened at those meetings
                asking each writer to record in a small index-card book (kept next to a desk
                phone) information about each telephone and in-person interaction he had
                with a potential reader or project participant
                asking each writer to collect printouts of all e-mail concerned with the docu-
                ment, copies of all drafts and notes, and written comments returned to him by
                reviewers
                 conducting discourse-based interviews with each writer of how decisions made
                 in drafts might have been influenced by social constraints characterizing their
                 environments or rhetorical situations
               ® whenever possible between each major draft, conducting open-ended inter-
                 views with each writer and his readers about possible social constraints on
                composing decisions or readers’ reactions

          Phase IV: Postcomposing Process Measures

          After each writer completed the document (or, in some cases, when documents were
          aborted for various reasons), open-ended interviews with the writer and intended
          readers were conducted concerning social constraints that may have affected their
          perceptions, decisions, reactions, and interactions during the document’s evolution.
          In addition, discourse-based interviews with each writer were conducted concerning
          perceptions about social constraints that may have influenced production of the lat-
          est draft of the document.
               Methodological triangulation was also used to analyze the data collected in each
          rhetorical situation observed. First, study participants were asked, as often as possible,
          to listen at the end of interviews to my interpretation of what had been said, and, at
          those junctures, adjustments in the data were made, as needed, to ensure accuracy.
          Once all the data had been collected and adjusted for accuracy, categories were de-
          veloped from the data, relationships between categories (themes) were detected, and
          then relationships between themes (models) were established, in a standard proce-
          dure described more fully in Doheny-Farina (Writing in an Emergent Business
          Organization). For example, in my study, one category that emerged from the data was
                                                 Spilka   ® Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   151


called “writers’ perceptions of readers.” One relationship, or theme, that was detected
between this and other categories was called “writers’ perceptions versus reality.”
Analysis of this theme involved examining instances to see whether the writers’ per-
ceptions about readers (e.g., reading behavior, purposes for reading, attitudes toward
the text) matched what the readers reported (e.g., methods of reading the text, pur-
poses for reading, attitudes toward the text).


RESEARCH FINDINGS
The model that emerged between the theme “writers’ perception versus reality” and
another theme called “orality versus literacy” suggested that writers who planned
mostly in isolation tended to have inaccurate perceptions about their rhetorical situ-
ations. In contrast, writers who interacted continuously during planning tended to
emerge with accurate perceptions about their rhetorical situations. In order to relate
in detail this important finding, I will first discuss typical rhetorical strategies em-
ployed by engineers who produced documents mostly in isolation and then the strate-
gies employed by engineers who interacted continuously throughout the composing
process.


The Rhetorical Strategies of Engineers Who
Produced Documents Mostly in Isolation
The two engineers in the study who did not communicate effectively with the major-
ity of their multiple audiences were the only ones who made conscious decisions to
work on their documents mostly in isolation. These engineers planned their docu-
ments and wrote first drafts on their own, and then showed these drafts to just one or
two reviewers. (This kind of review was a social expectation at both divisions of the
corporation.) The engineers then ignored most of the feedback received from review-
ers as they revised their documents—again in isolation—before distributing second
drafts to target readers.
      Because these engineers worked on their documents mostly in isolation and paid
little attention to any feedback that came their way, they virtually ignored what was
going on in their current rhetorical situations. They also ignored any social or
rhetorical changes that might have taken place since their previous rhetorical situa-
tions or since the start of their current projects. As a result, they based their compos-
ing decisions primarily on what they could recall about the past. As these writers
planned, wrote, and revised their documents, they focused on their recollections of
past purposes, past audiences, and past constraints. Therefore, instead of thinking in
terms of the particulars of their current situations, these engineers were thinking of
the particulars of past situations; instead of considering how to solve current prob-
lems, they were thinking of how they had once solved other, quite different prob-
lems in the past.
    Because these engineers were thinking in terms of past rhetorical situations, they
brought to their current situations content and social knowledge that had long since
become outmoded and inaccurate. By relying on knowledge rooted in the past, the
152   Chapter 3 =   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          engineers made composing decisions that their readers considered socially insensitive
          and rhetorically inappropriate.
              This study suggests that if corporate writers apply outmoded content or social
          knowledge when making composing decisions, they may have

               ¢ inaccurate perceptions of their readers and rhetorical situations
               e different task representations from those of their readers
               ¢ a lack of awareness of changes in social and political constraints

          All three of these problems can alienate readers.

          Inaccurate Perceptions of Readers and Rhetorical Situations

          First, writers working mostly in isolation can bring to their projects inaccurate per-
          ceptions about their current readers and rhetorical situations—perceptions that can
          lead to composing decisions that are insensitive to readers’ needs, orientations, or ex-
          pectations. In one case in the study, Don, working on the second draft of a written tu-
          torial, assumed his intermediary readers (members of a project team) would not care
          at all about the tutorial and would not read it: “They’re equally disinterested,” Don
          said. As he revised the tutorial, Don decided he would encounter no resistance if he
          ignored most of the ideas presented by the project team at a recent meeting. As it
          turned out, however, the project-team members did care about the tutorial; most read
          the second draft quite carefully, and, in interviews, most expressed dismay that Don
          had decided to incorporate just his own ideas into the draft. These readers felt that,
          despite Don’s revisions, the document remained insensitive to their viewpoints.
          Some representative comments were as follows:
               It’s not a shared view. The document still needs to show more consideration for the ideas
               of others.

               Meetings haven't been an influence on Don. Don has more influence on himself than
               anyone else can have. This is Don’s document.
               Don’s enthusiastic, but he doesn’t perceive others’ viewpoints. Too soon old, too late
               smart. Don has a limited perception of what the real world is. Don doesn’t always know
               what’s right, although he thinks he does.
               When Don writes alone, his writing is clean, crisp and precise, but not complete. It’s a bit
               parochial in view, and lacks depth of content. Writing successfully here is not intuitive—
               it comes from training and exposure.

               Similarly, in another case, Bill had been writing monthly reports for over two
           decades on a project he managed. While working on one particular monthly report at
           the end of 1987, Bill indicated that he was relying on the same content and social
           knowledge he had used to produce these reports two decades ago, and he also as-
           sumed the clients receiving the report were as interested in the research details as his
           previous readers had been. However, the clients, when interviewed later, indicated
           they had little interest in research details and felt the report did not address their ma-
           jor concerns regarding the project:
                                                    Spilka   * Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   153


    So, what’s the conclusion? If you can’t tell me what’s happening, why am I reading this?
    It doesn’t tell me what I need to know.
    Bill’s reports aren’t as well tuned to my needs as the reports I’m getting from other con-
    tractors.
According to one of Bill’s readers (a manager at another division), Bill tends to alien-
ate current readers by continuing to think in terms of past audiences he used to ad-
dress several decades ago when working on journal articles:

    Bill’s early stuff is famous and quite good. Here, he’s still writing for physicists, but he has
    a different audience, so this doesn’t work as well as his journal style. Here, he’s writing for
    program managers and engineers. They do not want to see the scientific method demon-
    strated. They want to see progress toward commercializing a project.


Different Task Representations

In addition to bringing to writing projects inaccurate perceptions about readers and
rhetorical situations, a second problem with a strategy of isolation is that the writer
can emerge with task representations that differ substantially from those of readers. A
task representations can be defined as the perception someone has about the funda-
mental features of a rhetorical situation, such as the expected purposes, audiences,
and form of a document. If a writer’s task representation does not match those of in-
termediary readers, the writer is likely to produce a document those readers will con-
sider inappropriate and unacceptable.
     Again, probably because Don worked mostly in isolation and ignored feedback
and ideas from the project team, his task representation matched that of his former
boss (who had just transferred to another corporate division) but not those of his
current readers. According to Don, the tutorial’s major goal was to assemble in one
document the project teams’ consensus about conceptual models. The audience
would consist of just the project team, and the appropriate form would be an outline
of major points covered at the meetings. However, unknown to Don, most members
of the project team wanted the tutorial to persuade upper management to approve
the project team’s consensus of the document’s message and instruct engineers about
the message. Most team members, after reviewing a draft of the tutorial, did not feel
it had achieved these purposes or was destined to meet the needs of its future audi-
ence. They also considered the document’s form inappropriate: They felt a formal
report, not an outline, would be the best way to demonstrate to upper management
that the team members had taken the corporation’s mission seriously and that they
had completed a thorough process of coming to a consensus about the corporate
message. Because they viewed Don’s draft as a major departure from what they had
hoped to achieve with the document, they reacted quite negatively to the draft,
considering it unacceptable for the purposes and target audience they had in mind
for the document:
    We wouldn’t send this to the outside. We need to think in terms of the customer [upper-
    level managers].
154   Chapter 3 # Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


               There are no direct links to how the internal customers would use this, or to their con-
               cerns.
               It won’t be clear to future users.

               It’s not ready for VPs yet.

           Lack of Awareness of Changes in Constraints

           A third problem with a strategy of isolation is that writers may remain unaware of
           changes in social and political constraints—conventions and taboos—caused by
           rhetorical, cultural, and environmental shifts that have evolved over time (since a
           previous project or during the current project). In the case of Bill’s monthly reports,
           several clients mentioned that Bill seemed out of touch with the economic problems
           that had emerged during the past decade—problems causing the clients to question
           whether to continue financing the project. Several clients said Bill’s reports typically
           omitted what concerned them most about the project: evidence of any progress from
           one month to the next that might convince them to reinvest in the project at the
           end of the fiscal year. One client said he might not reinvest, but if he did so, he would
           stipulate changes in the contract that would compel the monthly reports to focus on
           his major concerns:

               I need a task by task breakdown. When | renegotiate with Forbes, in that contract, I’ll
               specify that I want the report written task by task. I look for difficulties on problem areas
               that could have an impact on future progress, a forecast of next month’s activities, and a
               monthly incurred cost form, to compare that to what’s been done.

               Unfortunately, not just Bill’s clients, but also the majority of his internal read-
           ers—many of them colleagues and managers—felt his reports were focused on the
           past, not on current problems and concerns. As a result, although most of Bill’s read-
           ers respected his intelligence and scientific expertise, they usually turned to others at
           the corporation, not to Bill’s monthly reports, to become informed about how the
           project was going and whether it seemed to be fulfilling corporate or division goals.
                Along with these three problems, which led to the failure to satisfy the rhetorical
           goals of their projects, Don and Bill’s strategy of composing in isolation resulted in
           two social difficulties. First, their strategy of isolation did not meet the social require-
           ments of their corporation. A fundamental social belief at Forbes Electric is that writ-
           ers need to interact with others during the production of a document for purposes of
           acculturation and social acceptance. At the divisions observed in this study, contin-
           ual interaction during a project was considered instrumental to a writer’s process of
           learning about the division’s and corporation’s social contexts. In several cases in the
           study, intermediary readers indicated they had been asked by upper management to
           observe the ability of a primary writer to interact successfully with others during the
           project. Writer/reader interaction, therefore, can become a sort of initiation ritual, in
           which writers who interact frequently and effectively are more likely to be socially
           accepted and promoted in the firm than writers who isolate themselves and ignore
           what others think, say, and do.
                                                Spilka   * Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   155


     Second, because Don and Bill chose a strategy of isolation, many of their readers
expressed personal resentment at having been excluded from the rhetorical process.
Many felt socially shunned and were concerned that the writers had not recognized
what these readers might have contributed to the document—in particular, to
thetorical decision-making influencing what was said in the document, as well as
how it was said. According to several readers interviewed, regular consultation dur-
ing the composing process signals that the writer cares about what they think, and
no consultation during the process probably means the writer doesn’t care about
their ideas-—a conclusion, they said, that contributes to their negative assessment of
the writer and document.

The Rhetorical Strategies of Engineers Who Interacted
Continuously Throughout the Composing Process

Figure 1, an audience-adaptation model, illustrates the most effective strategies used
by the five engineers in the study who met with more rhetorical success than Don
and Bill. Although no single engineer used all of these strategies, each engineer in
the study except Don and Bill used different combinations during invention. (Note
that the steps in this model can be recursive, overlapping, and repeated indefinitely
according to what writers deem necessary or most effective.)
    This study suggests that interaction can help writers produce effective documents
by enabling them
     * to revise the initial multiple-audience analysis.
     ¢ to adapt discourse to multiple audiences and fulfill rhetorical and social goals.
     © to resolve competing or incompatible rhetorical goals, using both process-
       based and text-based strategies.

Revising the Initial Multiple-Audience Analysis

Steps (A) and (B) in Figure 1 illustrate how corporate writers, after completing the
initial rhetorical analysis, can choose to interact with others to revise that analysis.
In this way, they make the analysis more accurate and therefore more sensitive to cur-
rent audience needs, orientations, and expectations, and to the social features char-
acterizing the current rhetorical situation.

Interacting with Readers to Learn about the Rhetorical Situation
and to Revise the Initial Rhetorical Analysis
As step (A) in Figure 1 shows, a useful strategy in the first phase of audience adapta-
tion is to delay planning documents until after consulting with readers and other pos-
sible project participants to learn about the particular features of new rhetorical situ-
ations. This new knowledge helps writers revise, refine, or extend their initial
rhetorical analysis, so they can plan intelligent, accurate, and socially sensitive strate-
gies for appealing to readers in particular rhetorical situations.
     For example, writers can interact with readers to learn about the people in vari-
ous  locations who are likely to look at the document or be affected by the document's
156   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



                                                                                  (D)|:
                                                                                          Writers
                                                                                          making
                                                                                          text-based
                                                                                          decisions
                         Readers affecting writers                                        about the
                                                                                          readers,
                         Writers interacting to                      Planning             culture, and
                         learn from readers                          strategies           environment
                                                                     for
                                                                     appealing
                                        to revise the                to readers
                                        initial rhetorical
                                        analysis

                                                                                          Writers
                                                                                          producing a
                                                                                          draft and
                                                                                          distributing it
                         (E) Writers affecting readers
                                                                                          to readers

                         Writers interacting to influence
                         readers in strategic ways




                          to inform                      to gain
                          to persuade                    initial
                          to instruct                    audience
                          to make readers                adherence
                            “feel good"                                                   Readers
                                                                                          evaluating and
                                                                                          responding to
                                               to influence                               the document
                                               reading behavior

                                               to optimize
                                               conditions for
                                                                                     Written                Verbal
                                               the approval
                                                                                     feedback               feedback
                                               process




                                                                                          Writers responding
                                                                                          to readers by
                                                                                          interacting with
                                                                                          readers again or
                                                                                          revising in
                                                                                          isolation


                 Figure 1. An Audience-Adaptation Model.
                    “i
                                               Spilka   = Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   157


message. In consultation with their readers, writers might seek answers to questions
like the following:
     e What are the unique concerns of these future readers?
     e¢ What social, political, economic, and environmental constraints will affect the
       way they respond to thé project or document?
     ¢ What are their task representations: What expectations do they have about
       the documents’ purposes, audiences, and forms?

Writers can also inquire about the special constraints, conventions, taboos, and other
features of their rhetorical situations:
     © How does this situation differ from past rhetorical situations?
     ¢ How might it relate to future rhetorical situations?
     © How have recent economic, social, or political shifts affected current rhetori-
       cal situations, and how might these shifts affect future rhetorical situations?
As shown in the model, readers primarily affect writers during this juncture of the
composing process.

Delaying Planning to Interact Further with Readers and Expand
Knowledge of Rhetorical Situations
On the basis of what the writers learn from readers (and possibly from others), the
writers typically begin building fuller, more accurate constructs of their audiences and
rhetorical situations. [See step (B) in Figure 1.] However, in this process, writers may
discover gaps in knowledge—information salient to their documents and rhetorical
situations—that they would like to understand better before working on their docu-
ments. For example, writers might have learned from earlier interactions that more
readers will be involved in the communication process than originally expected, that
certain constraints   (e.g., time, money)   are going to be influential, or that certain
changes in relationships (e.g., a switch in social roles during the current project)
might alter the document’s outcome significantly. If writers decide they need to learn
more about their rhetorical situations, they might cycle back and conduct more inter-
actions with those people who can teach them what they need to know to make
rhetorically and socially sensitive composing decisions.

Adapting Discourse to Multiple Audiences and
Fulfilling Rhetorical and Social Goals

As step (C) in Figure 1 illustrates, perhaps while—but most certainly after—the writ-
ers conduct their initial rounds of interaction and revise their initial rhetorical analy-
sis, they begin to plan composing strategies. Typically, they decide to take one of two
routes: a quasi-independent route or a quasi-dependent (and socially interactive)
route.
The Quasi-Independent Route: Text-Based Strategies
for Multiple-Audience Adaptation
As step (D) in Figure 1 shows, the quasi-independent route involves working once
again in isolation to make composing decisions. However, unlike those writers who
158   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


          have chosen up to this point to work in almost complete isolation, these writers have
          just completed a series of writer/reader interactions [see step (A) in Figure 1] to learn
           about the particular features of their current rhetorical situations. Therefore, al-
          though the writers are now working mostly on their own, they can use the knowledge
          gained from the social interactions they have just completed to establish reader-based
          goals for their documents. With this approach, these writers are more likely than
          those who have worked in isolation from the very start to produce drafts perceived by
          readers as appropriate to their rhetorical situations.
               During this quasi-independent phase, the more effective writers in this study be-
          gan by categorizing the expected readers of their documents, based on their new so-
          cial knowledge of these readers. Then they applied a number of text-based strategies
          aimed at appealing to those various reader categories. (See Spilka for a fuller account
          of these strategies.)

                1. Categorizing Readers Before Applying Text-Based Strategies
                Categorizing readers in a way sensitive to the social or political features of the
           current rhetorical situation seems an important part of adapting texts effectively to
           multiple audiences. This study suggests, however, that categorizing readers according
           to organizational roles (e.g., managers, technicians, engineers) can be a mistake, be-
           cause doing so can lead to stereotyped impressions that, in turn, can lead to false or
           misleading generalizations about readers and socially insensitive composing deci-
           sions. For example, Don assumed his intermediary readers, categorized by him as “all
           managers and supervisors,” would think and act just like the managers and superiors
           in his previous Forbes job (at another division), and would be as “disinterested” in his
           drafts as his former bosses used to be. Similarly, Bill, working on his monthly report,
           assumed that his managerial readers would be too busy to look at all sections of the
           report but that the technicians, engineers, and clients would have sufficient time to
           read all sections slowly and thoroughly.
               However,   those readers interviewed    in the cases of Don’s tutorial and Bill’s
           monthly report didn’t think and behave the way the writers had assumed they would.
           Most of Don’s managerial readers were extremely interested in his tutorial, because of
           its importance to the corporate mission. Also, in all seven cases in the study, the
           stereotype that managers read documents in a certain way, while technicians, engi-
           neers, and other types of employees read in other ways, didn’t hold true; instead,
           managers were similar to other types of readers in choosing to skim or read docu-
           ments thoroughly depending upon their interest in the subjects or individual pur-
           poses for reading the documents. For example, if a manager were responsible for re-
           viewing a draft, he or she might read that draft more thoroughly than a client just
           interested in knowing how project money had been spent in the past month.
                Thus, this study suggests that categorizing readers according to their organiza-
           tional roles can lead to a focus on just one audience segment or feature; to mistaken
           impressions about readers’ needs, expectations, attitudes, and behavior patterns; and
           to a limited audience analysis that certainly can result in composing decisions des-
           tined to alienate readers.
                The more successful writers in this study typically categorized their readers in a
           way that was socially sensitive in their particular rhetorical situations. For example,
                                                Spilka   = Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   159


one engineer found that, in his situation, distinguishing between readers with and
without technical knowledge made the most sense, whereas another engineer de-
cided to distinguish between intermediary and final readers while working on a docu-
ment. Often, these writers would think in terms of the readers’ social and political
agendas and purposes for looking at the documents; typically, these writers would cat-
egorize readers according to the following features:
     @ the readers’ attitudes or levels of caring regarding the documents’ contents.
       (For example, in what way and to what extent are these readers involved in
       these projects? Which readers seem not to care at all, which ones seem to care
       just a bit, and which ones seem to care a great deal?)
     © the level of feedback on social and political constraints that readers would pro-
       vide.
     * the amount of power readers might hold and the ways readers might think or
       behave during or after the composing process.
     ® the readers or types of readers who, for various social reasons, should be
       avoided or contacted indirectly during the composing process.
     ¢ the juncture of the composing process at which various types of readers would
       be most likely to look at the document. (That is, some readers were likely to
       look at first drafts, some at second drafts, others at finished versions.)
     e the degree to which readers were likely to be thinking in terms of how other,
       future readers would respond to the documents, and why.


     2. Determining Objectives for Each Audience Segment
     After establishing reader categories, the more successful writers decided on cen-
tral objectives or goals they had in appealing to readers in the various categories. For
example, one engineer decided he would inform one audience segment, but both in-
form and persuade another segment.

     3. Using the Means/Ends Approach for Choosing Text-Based Strategies
     Some of the more successful writers used a means/ends approach to select the
strategies that would appeal most effectively to various segments of their multiple au-
diences. The first step in this approach is to determine a major goal for each impor-
tant audience segment; for example, a writer might decide to inform an external au-
dience and to persuade an internal audience. The writer then chooses one array of
strategies (such as use of metaphor, detail selection, word choice) to meet the first
goal of informing the external audience and a second array of strategies (such as de-
tail selection, choosing a certain format, arranging material in a certain way) to fulfill
the second goal of persuading the internal audience. Some strategies can help a writer
satisfy more than one goal for more than one audience segment.

    4. Finding Bridges
    Writers can try to include in their drafts features that they might have in com-
mon with readers and that their readers might have in common with other readers.
For example, one engineer in the study thought all his readers would be interested in
a sports-team metaphor and included that metaphor in his draft, while another engi-
160   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           neer suspected most of his readers would enjoy. physical descriptions of a location
           they had never before visited and wrote about that location in his document.

                5. Designing the Document to Control Reading Behavior
                and to Focus on Salient Issues
                This study suggests writers can manipulate the design of their documents to pro-
           mote any type of reading behavior (e.g., careful reading, scanning, skimming, skip-
           ping over text), according to the goals writers have for readers in their particular
           thetorical situations. For example, one writer decided to align headings along the top
           of a newsletter page to influence nontechnical readers to skim that page, and pre-
           dicted technical readers would still read all of it carefully. Similarly, another writer
           chose small type for the first draft of a document to discourage intermediary readers
           from paying too close attention to the text and to encourage them to approve it with
           few and minor suggestions for revision. Later, the writer enlarged the type so final
           readers would read the completed document more closely.

           The Quasi-Dependent and Socially Interactive Route: Process-Based
           Strategies for Multiple-Audience Adaptation
           Before writers begin to write or as they write, they might decide to interact further
           with readers and other project participants, but this time for a new reason. [See step
           (E) in Figure 1.] Instead of interacting to learn about the audience and social con-
           texts, the writers now interact with others to gain initial audience adherence, not
           only to their own approach to the project, but also to the documents’ intended pur-
           poses and contents. For example, before writers show readers drafts (or even start
           working on these drafts), they can use interaction as a tool for informing, persuading
           (negotiating with readers toward a consensus on an idea), or instructing readers about
           material they would like to include in the upcoming document.
                Writers can also use interaction during this phase of the composing process as a
           way to make their readers “feel good” about the project, the writers’ ideas, or the doc-
           uments’ contents. One effective method for helping intermediary readers feel good
           about a document is to ask them to participate in the composing process. In this
           study, most readers seemed quite pleased when writers asked them to help gather in-
           formation, write or revise sections of drafts, assist with illustrations, or attend meet-
           ings or oral presentations related to documents. For example, Charlie, working on a
           newsletter, noticed that a particular manager from another division tended to dis-
           agree with Charlie’s ideas; once Charlie asked the manager to help collect informa-
           tion for the newsletter issues, the manager voiced no further complaints. Similarly,
           Philip, working on a recommendation report, knew he needed the approval of a
           newly appointed manager greatly admired by the division asking for the report; Philip
           thought that if he could please the new manager, he could please several others in
           that division. By asking the new manager to become a coauthor of the report, Philip
           succeeded in obtaining her approval of early drafts, which, in turn, helped him secure
           the approval of others in that division.
                Another method that helps readers feel good about a document is to take the ini-
           tiative to talk informally or formally to them during the composing process about
           matters that seem to especially concern them (e.g., the project, strategies used during
                                                Spilka   = Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   161


the composing process, drafts, the final product). For example, as Charlie planned
what to include in a newsletter issue, he consulted frequently with members of the
council sponsoring the newsletter to make sure they agreed with his plans.
     Using social interaction as a strategy to gain initial audience adherence seems to
have beneficial effects later on when readers receive and evaluate documents. When
readers notice from a draft that the writer has listened to what they have said during
interaction and has incorporated their ideas into the document, they seem more
likely to trust the writer’s judgment. This study suggests that readers who trust a
writer and who are familiar already with much of what they see in the document
(probably because of previous interaction with the writer) tend to read and approve
drafts quickly; examine closely just certain document features or sections the writer
had mentioned to them earlier; and make just a few suggestions for revision, usually
on relatively low-level concerns requiring minor alterations at the word or sentence
level. As one engineer in the study pointed out, gaining the trust of readers—both
during the project and gradually, over time—is an important strategy for making the
entire document-cycling process more efficient.
     Besides optimizing conditions for the upcoming review of the document by gain-
ing audience adherence, interacting with readers during invention can fulfill impor-
tant personal and social goals for writers. For example, when readers receive docu-
ments, they might reflect on how writers have handled the projects so far. If social
interaction has been successful, the readers might recall how sensitive writers had
been in the way they had consulted others at the corporation and how flexible they
had been in adapting to audience needs. If people in power at the corporation are
pleased by the writers’ interaction with others during the project, they might reward
the writers by putting them on challenging or prestigious projects or by recommend-
ing their work to others looking for talented employees for special projects.
    As step (F) in Figure 1 illustrates, interaction can also aid writers after drafts have
been produced and distributed to readers. After evaluating a draft, readers typically
respond in one of three ways: They remain silent, provide verbal feedback, or provide
written comments. Sometimes, readers provide both verbal and written comments or
follow a long period of silence with verbal or written responses.
     This study suggests that, regardless of the readers’ responses or lack thereof, writ-
ers at Forbes Electric can benefit from taking the initiative to interact in person once
more with readers after giving them drafts. For example, several writers in the study
interpreted readers’ silence as indicating approval, when, in fact, the readers had re-
sponded negatively to the drafts and had decided (for various personal, social, or po-
litical reasons) to remain silent about their opinions. In several other cases, writers
received verbal or written comments unaccompanied by explanations of the com-
ments or suggestions for strategies the writers might use to resolve the problems com-
mented upon. In one case, the engineer’s program manager wrote in the report’s mar-
gins that the background section needed to be more “reader-oriented.” The engineer,
who had assumed that section was already reader-oriented, didn’t understand why the
manager had made that comment, which readers the manager might be thinking
about, and how the engineer could revise the section to the manager’s satisfaction. In
an interview, this manager said he lacked the time needed to write down explana-
tions of his comment but would be willing to talk to the engineer in person about any
162   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



           comments written in the margins. Therefore, corporate writers might benefit from in-
           teracting with readers after producing early drafts for clarification of why readers have
           suggested certain changes, for assistance with strategies for improving documents,
           and for amplification about the needs of future, intended readers.


          Resolving Competing or Incompatible Rhetorical Goals, Using
          Both Process-Based and Text-Based Strategies

          At Forbes Electric, writers often encounter competing or incompatible goals in their
          rhetorical situations and need to make choices in order to resolve the conflicts or
          overcome the incompatibilities. For example, a writer might feel pressure to fulfill the
          corporate goal of being efficient but might also want to delay a document’s comple-
          tion so the audience can have a chance to review and approve each draft produced.
          Or, perhaps the writer’s time frame is incompatible with that of intermediary readers;
          for example, the writer might want to distribute a draft right away in order to progress
          to the next phase as soon as possible, but readers might be too busy to look at the
          draft until much later.
               When a writer addresses multiple audiences, the number of competing and in-
          compatible goals is likely to increase. The writer is not negotiating with a single
           reader, environment, and culture, but rather with multiple readers, environments,
           and cultures. Certainly, writers need to consider whether their personal goals are
           compatible with the goals of different readers or types of readers, but writers also need
           to consider whether the goals of readers will conflict with each other. For example, a
           writer might receive incompatible advice from readers who perceive the rhetorical
           situation in completely different ways or who make opposing suggestions for plan-
           ning, writing, or revising. In addition, writers need to consider whether the goals of
           their culture conflict with those of the readers’ various cultures and whether the goals
           of the readers’ cultures might conflict with each other. For instance, the writer’s cul-
           ture may possess a primary goal of being efficient, while the readers’ cultures may
           have other primary goals, such as ensuring quality in the products, improving cus-
           tomer relations, or producing greater quantities of goods.
                How do corporate writers deal with conflicting or incompatible goals when ad-
           dressing multiple audiences? Markel believes writers might find it impossible to please
           everyone in multiple audiences by manipulating document features. However, this
           study suggests writers can resolve many conflicting or incompatible goals by selecting
           from a variety of text-based strategies enabling them to please different types of read-
           ers with different types of goals. For example, writers might aim global strategies at
           one audience segment and local strategies at another audience segment or aim strate-
           gies for informing at some readers and strategies for persuading at other readers. The
           possible combinations seem endless.
                Unfortunately, Markel’s belief reflects his focus on text-based strategies of audi-
           ence adaptation—a focus characterizing most technical-communication textbooks.
           This study, however, suggests writers can use both text-based and process-based
           strategies for resolving conflicts or overcoming incompatibilities. In one case, an en-
           gineer and an intermediary reader had conflicting ideas about how to arrange a
           newsletter format so readers would be encouraged to scan certain sections. The engi-
                                               Spilka   ® Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   163


neer used his own method of arrangement (a text-based strategy) and then interacted
with the intermediary reader (a process-based strategy) to assure her that even
though he had chosen his own text-based strategy over hers, the strategy chosen
would succeed in fulfilling the same rhetorical goal she had in mind (i-e., promoting
scanning). Both orality and literacy, therefore, can be used to resolve conflicts or
overcome incompatibilities; to ensure most audience members will be pleased, writers
can draw upon various combinations of process- and text-based strategies.


An Overview: Understanding the Roles of Orality in Multiple-
Audience Analysis and Adaptation and in Fulfilling Rhetorical
and Social Goals at Forbes Electric
The Primacy of Orality in Multiple-Audience Analysis

In this study, the more rhetorically successful writers were those who talked to readers
and other project participants to update, revise, and make more accurate their initial
impressions about their rhetorical situations. Interacting with readers early in the
composing process also enabled these writers to expand their knowledge about the
details of their own social contexts and those of various audience segments. Without
interaction, writers at Forbes Electric probably would depend exclusively on their
own personal observations and experiences—which typically are rooted in the past—
for knowledge about current social constraints and cultural conventions and taboos.
Also, these writers probably would depend primarily on guesses, assumptions, and
personal observations in evaluating how the various environments and cultures of
their readers might affect audience perceptions, attitudes, needs, and expectations. In
effect, these writers might try to create knowledge without checking first with those
who make and judge knowledge. At Forbes Electric, orality doesn’t just help writers
identify and learn about their readers; it is the principal medium by which they deter-
mine how readers’ orientations and impressions differ from their own and then use
this knowledge to plan intelligent, socially sensitive audience-adaptation strategies.

The Primacy of Orality in Multiple-Audience Adaptation

At Forbes Electric, orality, not literacy, seems the primary route by which the more
successful writers build constructs of readers and rhetorical situations, plan reader-
based strategies, write reader-based drafts, and make reader-based decisions during re-
vision. Orality, therefore, contributes substantially to the way documents are pro-
duced at the corporation.
     More specifically, at Forbes Electric, multiple-audience adaptation can be viewed
as an exercise in revising, refining, and extending the initial rhetorical analysis. By
interacting with others, writers learn the special features of particular rhetorical situ-
ations and then apply that knowledge in the form of process- and text-based deci-
sions enabling them to meet specific rhetorical and social goals. This study suggests,
too, that the social contexts of the corporation should have the greatest influence on
composing decisions and behavior and that orality is the principal means by which
the writers learn about and understand their social contexts and those of their read-
ers. Writer/reader interaction, in particular, enables writers to learn about the special
164   Chapter 3   «= Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          features of social contexts and use this knowledge to gain initial audience adherence
          to their ideas and documents, thereby optimizing conditions for audience approval of
          the writers’ rhetorical decisions and drafts.


          The Primacy of Orality in Fulfilling Rhetorical and Social Goals

          This study suggests that, at Forbes Electric, orality is more than just a key part of the
          document-cycling process; in successful rhetorical situations at this corporation, oral-
          ity is the primary way people communicate and reach consensus on the ideas and val-
          ues of the corporate culture. For example, in most cases observed in this study, almost
          all learning and information exchange took place in writer/reader interaction preced-
          ing the production of the first draft, and most of the rest of the information was ex-
          changed at informal or formal meetings or on the telephone after the first draft was
          produced and distributed. For example, one engineer’s intermediary readers found
          “few surprises” in his recommendation report, because this engineer had made a point
          of interacting with these readers throughout invention to secure or ensure their ini-
          tial agreement to the report’s contents. In another case, an engineer’s business plan
          was the result of a series of brainstorming sessions about the best marketing direction
          for the division; all ideas contained in early drafts of the plan had been formulated
          and developed previously in group discussions, and, if the document were approved
          by intermediary and intended readers, this approval would mean that the ideas con-
          tained in that document would represent the consensus opinion of the division.
                These cases illustrate how, even though primary writers at this corporation osten-
          sibly work on their own to produce documents, most writers collaborate with others
          throughout invention—primarily through social interaction—to formulate ideas;
          translate them into plans; receive from intermediary readers validation of the ideas
          and plans; and then produce a final draft which, if approved by readers, reflects the
          consensus of the corporate culture. At this corporation, the process of interacting is
          more influential than the product in fulfilling such corporate goals as developing
          ideas, helping professionals and managers reach a consensus on controversial issues,
          helping managers decide on favorable products or directions for division operations,
          helping users learn how to operate machines, inspiring employees to learn useful
          skills that will lead to improved processes, and instilling certain values in the
          thoughts and work decisions of employees throughout the corporation. Orality, in the
          form of writers negotiating with readers and of readers negotiating with each other
          toward new constructs of social reality, is the primary way that corporate writers,
          readers, and the composing process influence the culture and environment of this
           corporation.
                Thus, at Forbes Electric, orality is more significant than literacy in fulfilling
           thetorical and social goals. To one engineer, documents approved by audiences at
           Forbes serve mainly as evidence that previous social interaction has been successful
           in resolving differences between readers on controversial issues and helping them
           reach a consensus. This perspective seems accurate at this corporation. If a document
           at Forbes Electric is never read, this might signify that the document’s rhetorical and
           social purposes already have been fulfilled via orality and that readers see no need to
           look at the document. Similarly, if a document is only partly read, this might signal
                                                   Spilka   = Orality and Literacy in the Workplace   165


previous success in persuading a reader, via orality, to take special note of the particu-
lar subject covered by the document. If a document is only scanned, perhaps this in-
dicates that readers already know what the document contains because of previous
discussions and that they only want to see if any particular subtopic or item might
trigger an interest in learning more. At Forbes Electric, therefore, documents typi-
cally serve secondary functions. In this study, drafts served most often as backdrops to
orality (e.g., previous meetings, formal oral presentations, or informal discussions), as
a means of formalizing and confirming the consensus achieved earlier among readers
and between writers and readers, and as a means of building corporate knowledge
among those who hadn’t yet participated in the rhetorical situation.


THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THIS STUDY: ORALITY AS
A PRIMARY MEANS OF BUILDING AND SUSTAINING THE
CORPORATE CULTURE
So that we might better understand how, at Forbes Electric, orality can be the pri-
mary means of creating corporate knowledge and of building and sustaining the cor-
porate culture, this section will discuss the study’s findings in terms of Bitzer’s theory
of public knowledge.
     Bitzer believes public knowledge includes
    principals of public life to which we submit as conditions of living together; shared inter-
    est and aspirations; values which embody our common goals and virtues; our constitu-
    tions, laws, and rules; definitions and conceptual systems; criticism, philosophy, aesthet-
    ics, politics, and science; the accumulated wisdom proffered by our cultural pasts; and, to
    these, we add the personal facts of our public life.(87)

In terms of Forbes Electric, Bitzer’s notion of public knowledge is similar to the no-
tion of corporate knowledge. Bitzer’s theory implies that, to become part of (or ac-
cepted by) the corporate community, a new employee needs to develop corporate
knowledge.
     To develop corporate knowledge at Forbes Electric, an employee needs to rely on
continuous interaction with the corporate community. This finding is consistent with
Bitzer’s theory: Public knowledge, he writes, “can only be located in the public” (83).
     According to Bitzer’s theory, the employee also needs to interact with the public
continuously, because the public (and public knowledge) is always changing. As
Bitzer puts it:

    Public knowledge will change as new conceptions, values, and principles are added and
    old ones discarded, and as some of these recede to the background while others become
    dominant. (89)

     As demonstrated in the study at Forbes Electric, with each new rhetorical situa-
tion comes a new set of salient features characterizing readers. For example, the issues
that concern readers in one rhetorical situation probably won’t concern them to the
same degree in another rhetorical situation and might disappear completely and be
replaced by new concerns. Writers at Forbes Electric, therefore, shouldn’t consider
166   Chapter 3 = Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action


           initial corporate knowledge to be accurate or even relevant to their current rhetorical
          situations; instead, to keep up with what concerns readers in these situations, Forbes’
          writers need to keep interacting with these readers.
               Also, as this study illustrates, interaction seems important, not only for gaining
          knowledge, but also for securing audience adherence to ideas and rhetorical deci-
          sions—for gaining a corporate consensus that will have the effect of building or sus-
          taining the corporate culture. This finding is also consistent with Bitzer’s theory.
          “Public transactions” (80), he suggests, are needed because the public will test and
          confirm public knowledge throughout the rhetorical situation:

               The public is called into existence in response to exigencies produced by public transac-
               tions; a growing and rich fund of knowledge, based partly in share means and interests
               and partly in scientific inquiry, will serve the community as it moves forward in time and
               the circumstances of its environment; and this fund of knowledge will be subject to test-
               ing and confirmation as the public struggles with exigencies throughout its life.
               Rhetorical communication will enrich the public’s information, sustain its experiential
               knowledge, and provide modes of debate and discussion needed for intelligent decision
               and action. (80)

           As Bitzer suggests, corporate knowledge “is authorized and can only be authorized by
           the public” (83).
                This theory helps explain why writers at Forbes Electric need to discuss their
           ideas with members of their corporate culture during invention: Doing so helps these
           writers test and then confirm the ideas with the corporate community. The consensus
           of the corporate community about certain ideas will determine whether these ideas
           will be incorporated into the corporate culture or be rejected. Therefore,
           writer/reader interaction can be viewed as the primary means of building and sustain-
           ing the corporate culture.
               Corporate writers, this study suggests, can play an enormous role in creating and
           transmitting corporate knowledge. For them, the process of writing has the potential
           to shape much of the meaning and direction of the corporation. In effect, the corpo-
           ration runs on the basis of corporate knowledge. The process of writing, therefore, is
           more than just another routine task in a corporate environment; rather, it is part of
           what sustains the community.
                At Forbes Electric, the process of writing is also a principal means of learning cul-
           tural knowledge. New employees learn about their culture mostly from interacting
           with others at the corporation, observing what people say and how they say it, and
           observing other social interaction. Most younger writers have not yet acquired suffi-
           cient knowledge about social and political constraints to enable them to make sensi-
           tive composing decisions based on this type of knowledge. Typically, they consult
           with senior mentors: employees who have interacted with others long enough to
           have gained a fuller appreciation of social and political considerations and to have
           developed effective process- and text-based strategies. This behavior pattern of con-
           sulting senior mentors supports Selzer’s hypothesis that the longer an employee works
           at a company, the more knowledgeable that employee becomes about the company’s
           culture. This pattern also suggests strongly that employees don’t learn about their cul-
           ture or about writing primarily from reading documents, although doing so can help
                                                  Spilka   * Orality and Literacy in the Workplace    167


reveal some text-based strategies. Instead, employees learn most about their culture
and about writing in the workplace from other employees, via orality.


CONCLUSION                       $

The findings in this study have several implications for the profession. First, we need
to broaden our approach to multiple-audience analysis in the workplace: This analy-
sis needs to be considered in terms of the social features of the current rhetorical situ-
ation, which can greatly influence readers’ responses to the document in progress. At
a corporation, conducting an accurate, socially sensitive analysis of multiple audi-
ences probably requires interacting with project participants throughout the compos-
ing process to learn about these social features and then using this knowledge to re-
vise, refine, and expand the initial rhetorical analysis.
      Second, the profession needs to revise and expand its notion of multiple-audi-
ence adaptation. To make socially appropriate composing decisions that please the
majority of readers in multiple audiences and that resolve conflicts and incompatibil-
ities between multiple rhetorical participants, corporate writers can do more than im-
plement a wide variety of text-based strategies; they can also influence readers and
other project participants in positive ways by interacting with them at strategic junc-
tures throughout the composing process.
      Finally, the profession needs to develop a fuller appreciation of the multiple roles
of orality in fulfilling rhetorical and social goals. Writing in the workplace is an inter-
active, ever-changing rhetorical and social process—one that consists of an ongoing
chain of verbal and written interactions that, when combined, enable rhetorical par-
ticipants to build, shape, and reshape their cultures. Writing in the workplace needs
to be considered in terms of what takes place over time, across multiple rhetorical sit-
uations, as rhetorical participants interact with each other to build and sustain the
corporate culture.
     This study, therefore, has skimmed the surface of a complex rhetorical and social
process. Certainly, the profession needs to explore in greater depth what can happen
as rhetorical participants interact with each other, both in writing and verbally, in
their attempts to fulfill important rhetorical, social, and cultural goals.
References
    Bitzer, Lloyd. “Rhetoric and Public Knowledge.” Rhetoric, Philosophy, and Literature:
        An Exploration. Ed. Don M. Burks. West Lafayette: Purdue UP, 1978. 67-93.
    Doheny-Farina, Stephen. Writing in an Emergent Business Organization: An
       Ethnographic   Study.   Diss. Rensselaer   Polytechnic    Institute,   1984.   Ann   Arbor,
       UMI, 1985. DEU 85-00944.
    —., “Writing in an Emerging         Organization:      An   Ethnographic     Study.”    Written
       Communication 3.2 (1986): 158-85.
    Faigley, Lester. “Nonacademic Writing: The Social Perspective.” Writing in
        Nonacademic Settings. Ed. Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami. New York; Guilford
       Press, 1985. 231-48.
    Markel, Michael H. Technical Writing. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1984.
168   Chapter 3     #    Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



                 Odell, Lee. “Beyond the Text: Relations between Writing and Social Context.”
                    Writing in Nonacademic Settings. Ed. Lee Odell and’ Dixie Goswami. New York:
                        Guildford Press, 1985. 249-80.
                 Odell, Lee, and Dixie Goswami. “Writing in a Nonacademic Setting.” Research in the
                        Teaching of English 16.3 (1982): 201-23.
                 Paradis, James, David Dobrin, and Richard Miller. “Writing at Exxon ITD: Notes on
                     the Writing Environment of an R@D Organization.” Writing in Nonacademic
                     Settings. Ed. Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami. New York: Guilford Press, 1985.
                     281-307.
                 Selzer, Jack. “The Composing Process of an Engineer.” College Composition and
                        Communication 34.2 (1983): 178-87.
                 Spilka, Rachel. “Studying Writer-Reader Interactions               in the Workplace.”        The
                    Technical Writing Teacher 15.3 (1988): 208-21.

          DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             _. Use the four roles of orality in the composing process that Spilka outlined to analyze one
                of the examples in either the Driskill or Katz article. Evaluate how well orality in your cho-
                sen example was employed by the writer to achieve effective organizationally contextu-
                alized action.
              . Compare and contrast the effects of a strategy of isolation when employed in workplace
                vs. academic vs. creative fiction contexts. Include a discussion of organizational context in
                your analysis.
            W . Though Spilka’s article is not focused on developing a detailed definition of “rhetorical sit-
                uation,” her analysis identifies many features, many writerly-questions, and many issues
                   related to defining what rhetorical situations are. Locate these features, writerly-questions,
                   and issues, and use them to develop your own definition of rhetorical situation.
                 . Define organizational context and rhetorical situation. Explain how one relates to the
                   other, and argue why you think it is, or is not, valuable for professional writers to make a
                   distinction between the two terms. Use specific examples to support your argument.
                 . Assess the strengths and weaknesses of Figure 1 as a model for guiding professional writ-
                   ers. Based on your assessment, write a one-page plan of revision for the figure.
                   Implement your revision plan, developing a revised figure that you, as well as your class-
                   mates, would actually use to guide your professional work. (Your revision must include a
                   visual or visuals, but it can also include accompanying text.)
                 . Those in the field of writing and rhetoric have long debated the effects of defining writ-
                   ing as a socially interactive and contextualized practice vs. defining writing as the creation
                   of a product. Though Spilka’s study focuses on advocating a perspective and approach to
                   writing that is process-oriented, it acknowledges the functions and values of both writing
                   processes (orality) and writing products (literacy) within organizational contexts.
                   Summarize the functions and values of both, as argued by Spilka, and explain why you
                   agree and/or disagree with her position.
             CHAPTER           3

             Projects
      1. Assume the role of a freelance professional writer specializing in, among other areas, im-
         proving internal communications. Write a white paper analyzing the relationships between
         organizational contexts and internal communications. Use examples from Driskill, Katz,
         and/or Spilka to support your analysis.
       . Option 1 Assuming the role of a corporate trainer, develop a half-day workshop for depart-
         ment or division managers aimed at applying what you have learned about organizational
         and rhetorical contexts to help them improve writing in their departments or divisions. Your
         workshop should be appropriate for managers in both large and small, as well as profit and
         not-for-profit organizations.
         Option 2 Assume you are a member of a metropolitan area professional writing group made
         up of members from a variety of professional writing organizations, like the Society for
HHL
         Technical Communication      and the American Medical Writers Association. Your group meets
CHHESTOHOHOHOEHESEHHOHOSCHHOHHSSSHSHEHESEHSESTAELCEHSEHEHEHO

         once a month for a “brown bag workshop,” of sorts, with the goal of supporting continued
         education. For these meetings, one writer develops a short presentation, a brief workshop
         activity, and support materials on a particular issue/topic that will be of general interest to
         the group. Develop a presentation, workshop activity, and supporting materials aimed at ap-
         plying what you have learned about organizational and rhetorical contexts to help the other
         writers become more responsive and strategic organizational authors.
       . As the manager of the technical publications department with 15 staff writers in a growing,
         mid-sized computer software development firm, you have noticed that only a few of your
         most senior writers have a clear sense of how their work as writers can change the work of
         others within the company, as well as that of outside clients. At the same time, you have no-
         ticed that a customer-centered approach to product development has increased opportuni-
         ties for your technical writing staff to participate much    earlier in product development
        processes. With this change in the role of technical writers in product development, along
        with a company initiative to hire five new staff writers in the next two years, you decide that
        you need to do something to help your current and newly hired staff understand how their
        work as writers can impact the whole organization, including clients.
        You decide to write a sort of manifesto, or sub-mission statement for your department en-
        couraging all writing staff members to see themselves as organizational change agents. In
        your first sketchy notes, you identify two primary purposes for the document. First, you want
        it to rally your department around a revised sense of identity. Second, you want the docu-
        ment to serve as a constant reminder of and “recipe book” for organizationally situated ac-
        tion. In this second sense, the document should help department members understand the
        characteristics of organizationally situated action and help them strategize organizational ac-
        tion. Furthermore, you do not want this to be something that gets lost in a drawer; you want
        it to become a document each writer notices every day, one that your department refers to
        in staff meetings and while working in project teams. Your job is to write the document and
        to prepare a presentation you will use to introduce the document into your department's or-
        ganizational culture.




                                                                                                           169
170   Chapter 3   =   Professional Writing as Organizationally Situated Action



          4. The readings in this chapter have been chosen to open up some of the significant issues re-
             lated to professional writing as organizationally situated action; by no means do these read-
             ings establish a complete and final view of the issues surrounding organizational situation.
             In fact, there are quite complex arguments about such terms as “organizational context” and
             “thetorical situation” across a variety of fields (e.g., philosophy, rhetoric, anthropology, politi-
             cal science, and organizational studies) that, if studied, could yield more valuable insight into
             the issues surrounding the professional writer's work as organizationally situated.
             Individually, generate a list of possible research questions related to organizationally situated
             action. As a class, share and expand your list. Individually, choose a question you would like
             to research and report on back to the class, with the aim of developing a more robust un-
             derstanding of organizational situation, as well as possible implications for the professional
             writer. Write a report, publish the reports, and regroup as a class to discuss what you have
             learned from your reports.
               Professional Writing as
               Ethical Action
               Whether I do something or do not do something, I have engaged in action.
               Even the act of not acting is itself an act. And once I have acted, my actions
               can be determined to be ethical or unethical.

OSHOHOHTHEHESHEOHHEOHHBEHHOHEARHSHOHHHHHOE
OHHH



     INTRODUCTION
     This may seem like a very abstract way to open a discussion about the ethics of pro-
     fessional writing (and yes, it is), but there is a purpose behind it. The first purpose of
     this openingis to emphasize that whenever we write, we are in the act of doing some-
     thing, and as a result, it has ethical implications. That probably doesn’t surprise you.
     Most writers can quickly understand how their acts of composing are either ethical or
     unethical. For instance, if ] am a journalist and leave out pertinent parts of an inter-
     view that change the spirit of what the interviewee was saying, my writing act is cer-
     tainly unethical.
          What is not necessarily so obvious, though, is that what writers do not do is also
     an action. The second purpose of starting off so abstractly is to highlight this negative
     aspect of action. As an action, what we do not do has ethical implications also. For
     instance, if |am a journalist and after getting some information from a second party, |
     do not take time to check my source’s information, in my inaction, I may be acting in
     an unethical manner.
          The readings selected for Chapter 4 serve to open up ethical issues related to the
     practice of professional writing. The following questions can help guide you as you
     read:
             e What is the relationship between rhetoric/writing and ethics?
             e What sorts of ethical issues might writers face in professional contexts?
             © How can writers assume more active ethical stances?
             ¢ What are writers’ ethical responsibilities?
             e Who do writers serve?
             e What defines writers’ practices as ethical or unethical?
          When writing is understood narrowly as linking words and visuals to produce
     (ext the ethical dimensions of professional writing are, consequently, quite narrow.
     But when writing is understood broadly as a social practice, including all the sorts of
                                                                                                  171
172   Chapter 4     #® Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          actions and interactions that are embedded in the writing process, like meetings,
          brainstorming sessions, researching, and review processes, then the ethical dimen-
          sions of professional writing grow quite broad and complex. It is these broader, more
          complex issues that the readings in Chapter 4 bring to light and address.
               The first reading by Ornatowski examines, particularly through one case study, the
          complexities of balancing being bluntly honest and being politically effective when
          writing. Ornatowski’s selection deals with the kinds of word choice issues that most
          people associate with ethical issues in professional writing. The final two selections, by
          Katz and Porter respectively, address less familiar ethical terrain. Katz examines the
          complex inter-relationships between ethics, rhetoric, politics, and ideology. Porter’s se-
          lection directs our attention to such issues as the construction of one’s self as a writer
          vis-a-vis the reader and the writer’s processes as inextricably connected to ethics.



                                                                                               7@HeRMEK      ERS   COHSHTHETCHEREEHREORERHERE


                 FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
                 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
                 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
                 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
                 in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
                 the field itself.
                 1. selective emphasis
                 2. bureaucratic rationality

           Soe   eeaeesvreeeHOos    SIRO    HREHO   RDY    oe                     EREGMUOERERESHHOHCREARE
                                                                                               SETHE RARER EERRROES



                 BETWEEN EFFICIENCY                                     AND Poultics:
                                                                        /
                 RHETORIC AND ETHICS IN TECHNICAL
                 WRITING
           SORPROSSHERFH    SOLOS                         TSHEOHREREROSETEHRFEHESOHOETSVEDHDS SSSSSECTA
                                                                                                  SH SFHBOKDES RESO   HABE   Secesseveoe


                 CEZAR M. ORNATOWSKI
                 San Diego State University


          glbearer textbook rationales for the technical writing course locate the essence
             of technical writing in objectivity, clarity, and neutrality, and the need for teach-
           ing it in its usefulness to employers. Such rationales, however, are unable to accommo-
           date a notion of ethics and responsibility: if the writer merely serves the interests that
           employ her by reporting facts in an objective way, how can sheexercise choice when
           ethical problems arise? An alternative view is to see technical writing as always rhetor-
           ical and involved with potentially conflicting agendas and interests, with objectivity,
           clarity, and neutrality serving merely as stylistic devices in the writer’s rhetorical tool-
           box. Technical writers are rhetoricians who continually make ethical choices in serv-

           Source: Technical Communcation Quarterly, Volume 1, Number 1, Winter 1992, “Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric
           and Ethics in Technical Writing,” by Cezar M. Ornatowski, pp. 91-103. Reprinted by permission of The Association of
           Teachers of Technical Writing.
    Omatowski    =* Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in Technical Writing   173


ing diverse interests and negotiating between conflicting demands. The recognition of
the fundamental rhetoricity of technical writing is the first step towards accommodat-
ing a meaningful notion of ethics into the technical writing curriculum.
     Every semester, I begin the first hour of my basic technical writing class with a
brief introduction to “What Is Technical Writing and Why Do We Need It?” I say a
few things about what I think technical writing is all about and tell anecdotes from
my consulting practice to illustrate some major principles that we are going to cover
during the semester. Then I ask students to read Chapter 1 from their textbook, a
chapter that is usually called something like “Writing in the Workplace” or “Why
You Need This Course.”
     Here is what my students have found out by reading Chapter | in the textbooks |
have used in recent years. In the second edition of his Technical Writing, Paul
Anderson tells the student, “From the perspective of your professional career, one of
the most valuable subjects you will study in college is writing” (4). The major argu-
ment for the value of writing is implicit in the subheading that follows, “Writing Will
Be Critical to Your Success,” and the chief premise is usefulness of good communica-
tors to employers. “Besides enabling you to perform your job,” Anderson tells the stu-
dent, “writing well can bring you many personal benefits, including recognition in
the form of praise, raises, and promotions” (5). In a similar vein, Steven Pauley and
Daniel Riordan, in their Technical Report Writing Today, tell the student, “In industry
and business today, technical writing is an important part of everyone’s career” (4).
After citing the usual statistics to show that people at work write a great deal, Pauley
and Riordan conclude that “writing is extremely important for moving ahead in any
profession” (4). And, they add, when “done well, technical writing is an exciting, ful-
filling experience,” but when it is “done poorly, it is frustrating, even harmful to ca-
reer advancement”    (3). Finally, in his Technical Writing, John Lannon devotes one
page to a section entitled “Writing Skills in Your Career.” After citing two corporate
executives on the necessity of effective communication       on the job, Lannon con-
cludes that “good writing gives you and your ideas visibility and authority within your
organization,” while “bad writing ... is not only useless to readers and politically
damaging to the writer; it is also expensive” (10-11). Lannon cites the figure of $75
billion spent annually in American business and industry on communication, with
roughly 60% of the writing produced being “inefficient: unclear, misleading, irrele-
vant, or otherwise wasteful of time and money” (11).
      Behind the brevity of such rationales seems to lie the assumption that no serious
 effort—on either the author’s or the reader’s part—is needed to justify the enterprise,
perhaps because the need for “good writing skills” appears self-evident and common-
sensical in the terms in which it is presented. These terms are usually, as we saw,
 those of efficiency, effectiveness, and usefulness. The underlying catechism runs
something like this: to work in a social collective (a business organization, a govern-
ment institution,   a cooperative, etc.) you need to communicate. Towork effectively,
you needto communicate effectively. The principles of effective communication can
be derived from the general characteristics (structural, professional, cultural, per-
sonal) and needs of the appropriate social collectives and of the people who work in
                                      a more effective collective. More effec-
them. More effective communication means
tive collectives make for a better society. More effective collectives also make more
money. An incidental, but not unimportant, benefit is that if you communicate well
174   Chapter 4 ® Professional Writing as Ethical Action



           and make the collective more effective, you advance (and make more money). Ergo:
           effective communication is useful all around.
                Substantively, the major contentions that underlie this catechism are of course
           true, although the two middle terms, the contentions that the principles of effective
           communication may be derived from organizations and that more effective organiza-
           tions make for a better society, have been convincingly criticized by, respectively, David
           Dobrin and Carolyn Miller. For the rest, however, one must admit that people at work
           do indeed write a lot, a lot more than most students realize. Communication, and espe-
           cially written communication, is indeed one of the major modes of operating in any or-
           ganization or institution, just as the production, circulation, and consumption of infor-
           mation is one of the major activities of modern organizations. Finally, communication
           does cost money (I was recently told that the average “cost” of a technical report in an
           aerospace firm to which I was a consultant was around $5000), and poor communica-
           tion may seriously impede the functioning and effectiveness of an organization.
                Recently, however, I have been increasingly uncomfortable with this whole ra-
           tionale as a way of introducing a course in technical writing. It does not seem to ac-
           count for what we know about the complex nature of the relationship between lan-
           guage and its social contexts or to provide any meaningful and practical way to talk
           about the ethical dilemmas faced by writers in organizational contexts.
           Effectiveness and efficiency, understood in terms of usefulness to employers, as the
           basic premises for communicative action appear to leave the communicator no pro-
           vision, at least in theory, for action that does not “efficiently” further the goals of
           the institution or interests she serves. The clearest illustration of the problem
           comes from Anderson. In the introduction to his text, Anderson tells the student,
           first, that “writing well enables you to make a personal impact” (6), while a little
           later he tells the student that “as an employee, you will communicate for instru-
           mental purposes. That is, most of your communications will be designed to help
           your employer achieve practical, business objectives, such as improving a product,
           increasing efficiency, and the like” (7). Not much scope is left in the end of the
           “personal impact” Anderson promises students.
                 Several well-publicized cases of communicative “irresponsibility,” notably the
           Challenger disaster and the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, have been widely
           discussed in the literature (see, for example, Farrell and Goodnight; Winsor). Yet lit-
           tle seems to have changed in the wake of these discussions in terms of how we con-
           ceive of the nature of technical writing or how we see its teaching. Couldit
           “irresponsibility” is built into our present thinking about the nature of aide
           ing and into the very foundation of how we go about teaching it?
                I shall argue that it may be so and try to articulate the problem by redefining
           technical writing in rhetorical terms.


           THE PROBLEM
           In their study of the public rhetoric surrounding the nuclear accident at Three Mile
           Island, Farrell and Goodnight conclude that “the inadequacies of accidental
           thetoric at Three Mile Island point to a failure larger than the technical breakdown
           of 1979: the failure of technical reason itself to offer communication practices capa-
    Omatowski     ® Between    Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in Technical Writing     175


ble of mastering the problems of our age” (271). The “rhetorical crisis” that followed
the technical crisis, and that contributed to a sense of helplessness, paralysis, and
loss of public confidence in the ability of appropriate agencies to act in the public
interest, was caused, according to Farrell and Goodnight, by “systematic failures,
emanating from deep-seated contradictions in contemporary theories and practices
of communication” (273).    *
    The ethical dilemma that I have articulated at the beginning of this discussion is,
I think, but a surface manifestation of one such “deep seated contradiction.” The
contradiction goes beyond the difficulty of reconciling usefulness to employers with a
sense of personal and social responsibility. It is, I think, ultimately the contradiction
between two incompatible claims we make at once about the nature of technical
writing and two incompatible conceptions of language that these claims imply.
     One claim has to do with what technical writing does: it is effective and useful to
employers because it accomplishes practical goals. I will use Pauley and Riordan’s de-
finition of technical writing as an example. (I realize, of course, that textbooks do not
represent the profession and that to cite them as representative of what “we” hold is
presumptuous, if not wrong. However, textbooks may be taken, | think, to represent
the standard “paradigm” of current classroom practice.) Technical writing, Pauley
and Riordan say,

    is the practical writing people do as part of their jobs. . . . [Pleople generate documents as
    an expected part of their responsibilities. These documents enable businesses; corpora-
    tions; and public agencies, including governmental units, schools, and hospitals, to
    achieve their goals and maintain their operations. (7)

    The second claim has to do with what technical writing is: it is objective, plain,
neutral, clear, and so on. Pauley and Riordan, for example, characterize technical
writing as

    written in plain, objective language. Since its purpose is to inform or persuade a reader
    about a specific matter, technical writing focuses the reader’s attention on the relevant
    facts.... As much as possible, the words should not cause the readers to add their own
    personal interpretations to the subject. (8)

The essence of the contradiction is that two incompatible goals are held out for the
technical writer: to serve the interests that employ her effectively and efficiently
while being objective, plain, factual, and so on. What she finds in practice is that
serving specific interests (any interests, even the most public-spirited) requires at
least a degree of rhetorical savvy and that doing so is incompatible with “objectivity,”
“plainness,” or “clarity.” The latter, in fact, are not a writer’s goals or purposes but
stylistic devices that the technical writer employs in serving whatever interests it is
she serves. Objectivity may also, of course, describe the writer's attitude (however dif-
ficult such an attitude may be to maintain in practice), but the problem is precisely
the confusion between attitudes and rhetorical devices. As long as we do not distin-
guish, and train writers to distinguish, between rhetorical effects and human atti-
       s long                   gate the view that there is a language that does not in-
volve “eet                   on,” we have no way of talking about responsibility or
ethics that does not appear self-contradictory.
176   Chapter 4 =# Professional Writing as Ethical Action



                I confront this contradiction every day in my technical ‘communication class.
           Like probably most of us, | have students with different ‘professional backgrounds.
           Some are humanities majors, some are engineering majors, and a few are working en-
           gineers or other professionals. | cannot help noticing that the working students make
           adjustments to the stylistic principles we discuss, adjustments that are often as en-
           lightening as they are exasperating: “I can’t tell my boss about problems so directly”;
           “We can’t just tell the customer clearly the product failed the test”; “How do I use ac-
           tive voice without blaming my boss?” The honesty and, let’s face it, soundness of such
           comments contrasts with what I can’t help feeling is the naivete of the nonworking
           students, who take at face value—often with a vengeance—the stylistic injunctions
           to be clear and direct, to state the problem and to make messages explicit. The result
           may be well-formed reports, but I am forced to admit that they would never “fly” in
           the complex game of trade-offs and judgment calls that defines the communicative
           dynamics of real organizations. The student who writes “The engine failed the test
           and shipping it may endanger the lives of innocent passengers” in a technical report
           may be ethically well-meaning, but the report would never pass the review cycle. The
           problem, of course, is how do | explain this to the student without making her feel
           that this ethics stuff is just school baloney?


           RHETORIC AT WORK: AN EXAMPLE
           Let me offer an example of the kind of daily ethical and rhetorical decisions writers in
           organizational contexts typically (in my experience) face. Consider one engineer’s re-
           flections on the ethical dilemmas involved in writing a single sentence of an aircraft
           engine test report. The engineer (whom we shall call Stephen) works as a test engi-
           neer in a major U.S. aerospace firm. By education and training, Stephen is a mechan-
           ical engineer. He has worked in the firm for over eight years. He is in his mid-30s, in-
           telligent, quick, articulate. He has no formal training in technical writing. What he
           knows about writing technical reports he learned on the job, mostly from reading
           other reports, from company manuals, as well as from having his reports “redlined”
           and discussed by his supervisors. This practical training has made him well ac-
           quainted with the rhetorical and political subtleties of functioning effectively in the
           organization. | observed Stephen (and many other engineers in the firm) for nine
           months as part of a study of the rhetoric of technical information in the firm. I also
           conducted numerous interviews with Stephen and with other engineers.
                The excerpts below are taken from one of the taped interviews with Stephen,
           conducted while he was engaged, over a period of several weeks, in testing an elec-
           tronic controller (which | will call ELCON) for an auxiliary aircraft engine. The tests
           in question were environmental tests, in which ELCON was subjected to a variety of
           extreme environmental conditions: cold, heat, water, humidity, sand, and others. At
           the conclusion of the tests, Stephen began working on a formal engineering test re-
           port that would go through an appropriate approval cycle within the company and
           then be released to the customer (a major airplane manufacturer) and to the Federal
           Aviation Administration. It is this report, and specifically one sentence in it, that is
           the subject of the remarks quoted below.
               Stephen is trying to express the fruitlessness of repeated attempts to start the en-
           gine through the ELCON during the low temperature test. He is trying to express the
    Ornatowski     ® Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in Technical Writing             177


“hopelessness” of trying to start the engine. He does not want to “lie” (his word) and
make it seem that ELCON           worked much better than it did, yet he is aware that he
cannot simply say “hopeless,” because that puts a very important and expensive prod-
uct in an unfavorable light, and he is sure his supervisors, and especially the program
office, would object to his choice of words. The sentence he ended up writing in the
official test report reads: “There was a problem encountered during the low tempera-
ture test, in which the power-up of the ELCON after cold soak was fruitless initially”
(my emphasis). Here is how Stephen explained his choice of the word “fruitless.”
(The quotation is long, but I think worth citing in its entirety so as not to lose the
sense of the full dimensions of the rhetorical choices Stephen is making here.)
     Here is a political sentence. “There was a problem encountered during the low tempera-
     ture test, in which the power-up of the ELCON. . .” After it sits in a box at minus 67 de-
     grees for six hours, then you have to turn it on. Well, when it came time to turn it on, the
     ELCON, the power supply inside, didn’t respond. Kind of like when you turn your car on
     and the battery’s dead and you just hear the click. So, how do you write that up? So, .. . I
     don’t think I actually put the agonizing I did over this sentence in here. But [ agonized
     over this sentence because |didn’t want to say, let’s see, it still says “fruitless initially,” and
     that’s essentially what . . . that’s what I ended up saying. But you don’t want to say “hope-
     less,” whereas there was no way this thing was going to start, and that’s really what it was.
     We tried for about a half hour and that thing wasn’t going to start, the power wouldn’t get
     to it. It had to do with all the circuitry being soaked to that temperature. So we tried for a
     half hour, which is eons in terms of electricity. You know, you flip a switch the light goes
     on, that’s how electricity is, so half an hour is. . So how do I write this up? The ELCON
     failed in power-up. That does not describe it, because we tried again and again and again.
   ~ Do I really want to say that we tried, you know, forty five times in thirty minutes to power
     this thing up, you know? So I came up with “fruitless” only because it tells the story with-
     out saying that I did it again and again and again. To me it was hopeless, but “fruitless”
     says it like, “Yeah, we didn’t get the power up,” and it doesn’t say “We tried ninety billion
     times,” and it doesn’t say “We tried once,” it just says “We didn’t get the power up.” And
     that is as vanilla as I can make that, that’s as benign a statement as I can make without
     tipping my hand, so to speak. .. . It’s not so difficult to try and document what happened
     but there is... there are points at which you don’t want to hurt yourself, you don’t want
     to... you don’t want to harp on anything in particular. This, the only way I could docu-
     ment what happened without making it sound like the horror show it was, was to just say
     “Initially we had trouble,” which is true. It’s a bit of an understatement, but it is true.
     Stephen’s dilemma is how to tell the technical “truth” while at the same time
telling it within the boundaries of outcomes and implications of events acceptable to
his supervisors and to the report’s customers. Note, however, that even the “technical
fact” is largely a matter of personal perception and interpretation: is the attempt
hopeless or just fruitless? It may depend on how impatient one feels that day or how
long it is till lunch time. Elsewhere, Stephen described the rhetorical strategy he uses
in writing his reports as “selective emphasis.” In the statements below (taken from
the same interview), he explains what he means by “selective emphasis.”
    You can change the message that you give with a report by not highlighting certain data.
    It’s probably most apparent in something like a performance report. If I’m documenting
    engine performance there is [sic] a lot of things that | could look at, to say that it’s a good
    performer or a bad performer. You ask can I change the slant of the report by changing the
    data. I would say no, the data is what the data is: sacrosanct. What I can do is highlight
178   Chapter 4   ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



               data, withhold data, present it in a different fashion, like, ] could tell you this engine was
               a great performer. It’s delivered its shaft power; it’s delivered bleed. And you might not
               know that this engine is high on specific fuel consumption. . . . So, yes, there are ways you
               can change how a report is perceived, or how a test event is perceived. Actually, if you
               present everything, it becomes a matter how you highlight it with the prose. And that’s
               the final thing I would say to you: You can’t change the data, but you can certainly change the
               positive/negative of a given issue. | even think it is incumbent on everybody to do just that, par-
               ticularly when you are writing for the customer. If you ask anybody in this [test] depart-
               ment, I’m sure you'll get some hard-ass answers about, you know, the data is what the data
               is. |don’t think anybody here [in the test department] has ever cut a corner in that sense.
               On the other hand, I think between us test [department] and the project [project manage-
               ment, responsible for liaison with customers], the stuff that gets out of here is reasonably, I
               wouldn’t say “censored” but its... it’s, maybe I will say “censored,” yeah, it’s been re-
               viewed to the point that as little damaging statement as possible is included.
               Stephen is considered a “good writer” among the people for whom he writes: the
          program managers and the customers. His success appears to be due, in large part, to
          his rhetorical acumen, to his ability to make the delicate trade-offs and decisions al-
          luded to in the passages quoted above. By contrast, I have talked to, and seen reports
          written by, engineers who do not enjoy the reputation of being “good” (read “effec-
          tive”) writers and whose reports are always heavily reviewed and often need to be re-
          vised by the supervisors themselves before being officially released. The major prob-
          lem that these writers have (as ] gathered from studying their reports and from
          discussing their reports with their supervisors and co-workers) is not that they do not
          know what an engineering report should look like (they have learned that on the job
          and the format is prescribed in departmental Policies and Procedures) or that they
          cannot      write “good” sentences        (their sentences       are no better or worse           than
          Stephen’s). Rather, they are heavy-handed and naive in reporting facts, not politi-
          cally astute or willing to be astute, or not linguistically accomplished enough to be
          able to be astute, to negotiate the subtle lines between political prudence and neces-
          sary disclosure.
                      my research in that firm I concluded that a good organizational writer is
            ne who can negotiate successfully the subtle boundary between, on the one hand,
           he stylistic and formal demands of clarity, objectivity, neutrality, format, and effec-
            ive use of visual devices, and, on the other hand, the institutional, social, and situa-
                 I(read: political) demands placed on the text. In my experience, all organiza-
           tional communication, including technical documentation, bridges the gap between
           the physicality of technical phenomena on the one hand and their organizational
           and social meanings on the other hand, between data as technical and as social facts.
          It is this inevitable gap—the gap that arises, for instance, when unruly events and the
          idiosyncrasies of gas turbine thermodynamics are at odds with the political and eco-
          nomic exigencies and stakes—that defines the rhetorical “space” which most techni-
          cal documents written in real environments must bridge. As Edwin Layton has ob-
          served, “organizations like the federal government or a modern corporation have
           other ends in view than the best and most efficient engineering” (3). It is the differ-
           ence between these “other ends” and the theoretical ideal of the “best and most eff-
           cient engineering” that define the major arena of rhetorical choice and ethical con-
    Omatowski    # Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in Technical Writing   179


flict for writers of technical documents in organizations. The ethos of engineering re-
ports, I noted in my research, is always constructed out of uneasy compromises and
accommodations, even though many engineers are troubled by the fact that their re-
ports are “censored”—as Stephen hesitantly put it.



THE DILEMMA REVISITED
My problem as a teacher (and theorist) comes down to this: I know that technical
writing in real-world contexts is much more political and rhetorical than the text-
books make it out to be and that it is in this political/rhetorical sphere that ethical
problems arise. The problem is that the standard textbooks and the standard curricu-
lum offer no way to deal with this knowledge without seeming to throw away the
whole shop. If writing documents is only a matter of clearly marshalling objective
facts and designing readable texts, “ethical” problems should not arise. Something
would either be a fact or not be a fact, be clearly relevant or be clearly irrelevant. My
students, the ones who do not work, feel very smug about being honest and get impa-
tient when I talk about ethics. How could one be so stupid or such a crook, they ask
when we discuss the Challenger tragedy. They are right. If technical writing is just a
matter of designing clear documents, the only way ethical problems could arise is
through ignorance of facts or sheer stupidity (the former being, interestingly, the fa-
vorite defense of those who are accused of “irresponsible” practices). In fact, the way
ethics are alluded to in most textbooks, almost incidentally and parenthetically and
usually in the form of a simple injunction to be “honest” or “ethical,” shows the in-
ability of the standard rationale to develop a more sophisticated notion of ethics than
simple avoidance of outright dishonesty. The mechanisms for “audience analysis,” for
determining the reader’s needs, for analyzing the situation, offer no tools for discern-
ing or discussing the more subtle, and essentially political, choices, pressures, and
agendas that one encounters in real environments.
     As a teacher, one could agree with Sherry Southard that “being professional
means knowing the proper protocol for the corporate world” and that it is such proto-
col we should be teaching (90). While        such a position is no doubt realistic, it
amounts to throwing in the towel on ethics, because it contains few provisions for ac-
tion outside bureaucratic control and outside simply serving corporate interests that
pay the bill. One could go to the other extreme and advocate rebellion, a rhetoric of
“dissention,” as proposed by John Trimbur, who suggested that we should replace “the
‘real world’ authority of consensus with a rhetoric of dissensus” (615). The problem
with this attitude as a premise for teaching and practicing technical writing is that as-
suming a perennially contestatory stance puts the communicator in danger of becom-
ing, at best, substantially irrelevant (like those proverbial “nyet” men in the Soviet
Politburo) or, at worst, unemployed. It is also questionable whether programmatic
contestation really leads to a better understanding of the nature of language, of the
relationship between language and its social contexts, and of the nature and role of
technical communication. I have problem seeing it, for instance, as a coherent ratio-
nale for a technical writing curriculum.
180   Chapter4   #8 Professional Writing as Ethical Action


                   rolyn Miller has suggested that technical writing ought to be reconceived as “a
             atter of conduct rather than of production, as a matter of arguing in a prudent way
               ard the good of the community rather than of constructing texts” (23). Although
          emotionally I am in agreement with this sentiment, I do not see how it solves the
          practical and pedagogical problem. Employees, after all, are paid to render services to
          employers and to further their goals “effectively” and “efficiently.” Institutional read-
          ers “need” a document that does a certain job, and they won’t accept one that does
          not do it to their satisfaction, no matter how lofty the social sentiments of the writer.



          EFFICIENCY IS POLITICS
          TECHNICAL WRITING IS RHETORIC
          To begin to find a way towards dealing with the problem of ethics realistically and ef-
          fectively, we must, I think, accept two premises. The first premise is that organizational
          efficiency is always involved with politics. Aaron Wildavsky has offered a definition of
          politics that, I think, is very appropriate in this context. Politics, Wildavsky suggests,
          is an essentially social process by which an institution se resources to meet
          pressing needs” (94). The second premise is that technical ¢             e    always inev
          rhetoricians precisely because they are “useful” to emp! ast a their writing         is   “eff
          tive.” In fact, technical writing is a form of rhetoric developed in, and uniquely eared
          to, the social contexts in which it typically takes place. Let me explain.
               The most common contexts for technical writing are business/industrial organi-
          zations and government institutions. The dominant purpose of such organizations (as
          well as the major criterion by which the people who work in them are judged as effec-
          tive) is the maximization of advantage and increased control of resources in the ma-
          jor operative spheres: economic, political, intellectual. It is the maximization of the
          symbolic or real “capital.”
               Communication serves this goal as much as do other institutional activities.
          Technical documents (engineering reports, model specifications, proposals, annual
          reports, financial reports, business plans, product brochures, manuals, and other docu-
          ments) play an important role in the dramaturgy of organizational life through which
          the organization and, within the organization, the various departments, interests, or
          individuals, garner resources and advance their causes (for an example, see Barbara
          Mirel’s discussion of the political functions of a user manual). In this dramaturgy, rea-
          son (or the appearance of reason) is the fundamental condition of effectiveness, and
          it is reason, or its appearance, that well-designed technical documentation provides.
          Richard Ritti has argued, following Max Weber, that the dominant “world-view” (by
          which Ritti understands “the framework of beliefs, attitudes, and values that provides
           the basis for classifying, interpreting, and understanding the events of everyday life”)
           of most contemporary organizations, whether private, public, or governmental, is bu-
           reaucracy (104). Bureaucracy is characterized by legality, impersonality, and rational-
           ity, subsumable under the major functions of planning, organizing, leading, and con-
           trolling. Within the compass of bureaucratic rationality, all problems must be (or
           must appear to be) amenable to technical, rational (note the common collusion of
           the two terms) solutions comprised of a step-by-step cycle of setting goals, developing
           a plan, accumulating relevant facts, deciding on the best course of action, and so on.
     Ornatowski    ® Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in Technical Writing   181


  Because of its implicit and traditional association with science and technology and its
  “rational” pretensions, embodied in the stylistic attributes of clarity, directness, factu-
  ality, objectivity, and neutrality, technical communication is well suited to serve as
 the rhetorical instrument of organizational-bureaucratic rationality. It is also
 uniquely, and conveniently, congruent with the cultural self-perceptions of the peo-
 ple who dominate business and industrial organizations. Ritti describes American
 corporate culture as a culture of “‘decision-makers’; of crisp, hard-hitting, two-fisted
 decision-makers; of bottom-liners; of players of hardball. The metaphors are redolent
 of efficiency and effectiveness. Facts exist, can be weighed, and objective outcomes
  maximized” (104, emphasis adden                            heit      rts to be factual, ob-


       It is eee in this sense that technical writing is “useful” to employers and that is
  implicitly and ultimately why we teach it.
       The traditional catechism has got it wrong—it is not that technical writing is
  important because communication costs money and may have an impact on one’s ca-
  reer, but the other way round—organizations and institutions are willing to spend big
  money on communication, and communication may have an impact on one’s career
  because it is useful—and that’s why it is in demand and that is why we teach it. Here
  comes the rest of my catechism. It is useful because it is a vital element in furthering
  the goals (business, political, economic, and other goals) of organizations and institu-
  tions. It furthers those goals because it is fundamentally rhetorical, just like any other
  use of language, and its rhetoric is uniquely suited to organizational and institutional
  rationality. The essence of its usefulness lies in the fact that it is capable of giving a
  rational, technical, “scientific” mantle to agendas that are always in some measure
  political and that it gives the illusion of objectivity to what are always and inevitably
  interpretations. The fact that we do not commonly think that way about it is its
 greatest rhetorical asset. Realizing this is the first step towards having the capacity to
 analyze the trade-offs and bargains that one makes. And that is the first step to talk-
 ing sensibly about ethics.
      Of course, in saying this, I have not solved my initial problem. But I have articu-
 lated the problem in a way that lets me talk abut it as an integral part of what I see
 technical writing to be, and that articulation is in keeping with some other things |
 know about language, writing, and social contexts. That way of articulating it also
 engages technical writing with theories of human action and its institutionalizations.
 Paul Anderson isright in telling students that writing isone of the most valuable
             illtake in college. But I think the reasons we usually give for this value
miss the al point.

 Works Cited
      Anderson, Paul V. Technical Writing: A Reader-Centered Approach. 2nd ed. New York:
         Harcourt, 1989.
      Dobrin, David N. “What’s the Purpose of Teaching Technical Communication.” The
         Technical Writing Teacher 7 (1985): 146-76.
      Farrell, Thomas B., and G. Thomas Goodnight. “Accidental Rhetoric: The Root
          Metaphors of Three Mile Island.” Communication Monographs 48 (1981):
          271-300.
182   Chapter 4     ®    Professional Writing as Ethical Action



               Lannon, John M. Technical Writing. 4th ed. Glenview: Scott, 1988.
               Layton, Edwin, Jr. The Revolt of the Engineers: Social Résponsibility and the American
                   Engineering Profession. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1971.
               Miller, Carolyn R. “What’s Practical About Technical Writing?” Technical Writing:
                   Theory and Practice. Ed. Bertie E. Fearing and W. Keats Sparrow. New York: MLA,
                   1989. 14-26.
               Mirel, Barbara. “The Politics of Usability: The Organizational Functions of an In-
                   House Manual.” Effective Documentation: What We Have Learned from Research.
                   Ed. Stephen Doheny-Farina. Cambridge: MIT P, 1988. 277-298.
               Pauley, Steven E., and Daniel G. Riordan. Technical Report Writing Today. 4th ed.
                   Boston: Houghton, 1990.
               Ritti, R. Richard. “The Social Basis of Organizational Knowledge.” Organization—
                   Communication: Emerging Perspectives. Vol. 1. Ed. Lee Thayer. Norwood: Ablex,
                   1986. 102-132.
               Southard, Sherry G. “Interacting Successfully in Corporate Culture.” Journal of
                        Business and Technical Communication 4 (1990): 79-90.
               Trimbur, John. “Consensus and Difference in Collaborative Writing.” College English
                  51 (1989): 602-16.
               Wildavsky, Aaron. The Politics of the Budgetary Process. Berkeley and Los Angeles: U
                        of California P, 1964.
               Winsor, Dorothy. “The Construction of Knowledge in Organizations: Asking the
                  Right Questions About the Challenger.” Journal of Business and Technical
                        Communication 4 (1990): 7-20.


          DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. If the value of professional writing is not efficiency, explain what its value is.
             2 Analyze at what point(s) in the writing/work process that ethics becomes a matter of
                  practice for professional writers. (Your response will depend on the definition and scope
                  of rhetoric that you assume; therefore, you need to clearly define rhetoric and its scope.)
             WN . Ornatowski suggests that effective writers “negotiate the subtle lines between       political
                  prudence and necessary disclosure.” Explain what he means by this, referring to the
                  example of Stephen. Then, assess in what ways you think Stephen effectively and inef-
                  fectively acted prudently (you may wish to refer to Miller, Chapter 2, for a definition of
                  prudence). In your assessment, identify some of the consequences that might result from
                  Stephen’s rhetorical practice.
                . Ornatowski argues that technical/professional writing is “useful because it is a vital ele-
                  ment in furthering the goals (business, political, economic, and other goals) of organiza-
                  tions and institutions.  ... and its [technical/professional writing’s] rhetoric is uniquely
                  suited to organizational and institutional rationality.” Explain what Ornatowski assumes is
                  the rhetoric of technical/professional writing, referring to its scope, function, and value.
                  Or, to take a slightly different approach, explain what Ornatowski assumes is the role of
                  the technical/professional writer.
                  Professional writers are regularly engaged in making various levels of ethical decisions;
                  however, these decisions are rarely discussed as part of professional practice. In contrast,
                  hospitals have ethics boards that meet regularly to discuss issues of ethics. Evaluate the
                  idea of instituting an ethics committee for professional writers within an organization (or
                  an online version for independent writers).
                 Katz     =* The Ethic of Expediency:                               Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the Holocaust                       183

   OLS   t eGo          eae     ROSS      SPRL           SS   HE   RER        ESA   ELEO    OS       PVERSIRYSRFHSEHSE      TRESS    E HH   RBHDD


       FOCUSING C
                ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
       Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
       Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
       lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
       in professional writing and rHetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
       the field itself.
       1. deliberative rhetoric
       2. means/ends
       3. organizational ethos
       4. epistemology of objectivity
       5. telos
       6. polis

                                                                                                   FORTE   SARAH   RHE EH   TSHR    SH REPRE    DRADER OY



       THE ETHIC OF EXPEDIENCY:                                                                    CLASSICAL
   RHETORIC, TECHNOLOGY,                                                                         AND THE
  A OLOCA UST
   *                                         THOHHHRSE                   HH    SHIRE       HHMSTLRESEPRIRSSEH
                                                                                                   SHAD HPO SP STORSR HS EOBHHE ES


  "STEVEN B KATZ
         “(T]he stronger this faculty is, the more necessary it is for it to be combined with integrity
         and supreme wisdom, and if we bestow fluency of speech on persons devoid of those
         virtues, we shall not have made orators of them, but shall have put weapons into the
         hands of madmen”—Cicero, De Oratore III: xiv. 55.
                                                                                      * OK OK


         Geheime Reichssache (Secret Reich Business)
         Berlin, June 5, 1942

         Changes for special vehicles now in service at Kulmhof (Chelmno) and for those now be-
         ing built
         Since December 1941, ninety-seven thousand have been processed [verarbeitet in
         German] by the three vehicles in service, with no major incidents. In the light of obser-
         vations made so far, however, the following technical changes are needed:
         [1.] The vans’ normal load is usually nine per square yard. In Saurer vehicles, which are
         very spacious, maximum use of space is impossible, not because of any possible overload,
         but because loading to full capacity would affect the vehicle’s stability. So reduction of the
         load space seems necessary. It must absolutely be reduced by a yard, instead of trying to
         solve the problem, as hitherto, by reducing the number of pieces loaded. Besides, this ex-
         tends the operating time, as the empty void must also be filled with carbon monoxide. On
         the other hand, if the load space is reduced, and the vehicle is packed solid, the operating
         time can be considerably shortened. The manufacturers told us during a discussion that


Source: Katz, Steven B. “The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the Holocaust.” College English 54.3
(March 1992), pp. 255-275. Copyright 1992 by the National Council of Teachers of English. Reprinted with permission.
184   Chapter 4     #® Professional Writing as Ethical Action


               reducing the size of the van’s rear would throw it badly off balance. The front axle, they
               claim, would be overloaded. In fact, the balance is automatically restored, because the
               merchandise aboard displays during the operation a natural tendency to rush to the rear
               doors, and is mainly found lying there at the end of the operation. So the front axle is not
               overloaded.
               2. The lighting must be better protected than now. The lamps must be enclosed in a steel
               grid to prevent their being damaged. Lights could be eliminated, since they apparently are
               never used. However, it has been observed that when the doors are shut, the load always
               presses hard against them as soon as darkness sets in. This is because the load naturally
               rushes toward the light when darkness sets in, which makes closing the doors difficult.
               Also, because of the alarming nature of darkness, screaming always occurs when the doors
               are closed. It would therefore be useful to light the lamp before and during the first mo-
               ments of the operation.
                  3. For easy cleaning of the vehicle, there must be a sealed drain in the middle of the floor.
                  The drainage hole’s cover, eight to twelve inches in diameter, would be equipped with a
                  slanting trap, so that fluid liquids can drain off during the operation. During cleaning, the
                  drain can be used to evacuate large pieces of dirt.
                  The aforementioned technical changes are to be made to vehicles in service only when
                  they come in for repairs. As for the ten vehicles ordered from Saurer, they must be
                  equipped with all innovations and changes shown by use and experience to be necessary.
                  Submitted for decision to Gruppenleiter II D,
                  SS-Obersturmbannfiihrer Walter Rauff.
                                                                                                   Signed: Just


          THE FINAL SOLUTION: AN ETHICAL PROBLEM IN RHETORIC
          This is a real memo, taken verbatim from the published transcript of Shoah, a 9-hour
          documentary film on the holocaust directed by Claude Lanzmann (103-05). In this
          memo, the writer, Just, attempts to persuade his superior, Walter Rauff, of the neces-
           sity for technical improvements to the vans being used in the early Nazi program of
           exterminating the Jews and other “undesirables,” just months before the Final
           Solution of gas chambers and death camps was fully operationalized. In this earlier
           stage of the Final Solution, four Einsatzgruppen, or “Special Action Groups,” A, B,
           C, and D, had been organized by Himmler to carry out executions by firing squads
           (Shirer 1248-49). Group D, whose field of operations included the southern Ukraine,
           was from June 1941-June 1942 headed by Otto Ohlendorf, in the R.S.H.A.,
           Himmler’s Central Security Office (Shirer 1249). In 1942, Himmler ordered gassing
           vans to be used for executing women and children, because it was more efficient, “hu-
           mane” (see Shirer 1250-51, 1254n.). The Wannsee Conference, in which the details
           of the Final Solution were worked out, had been held on January 20, 1942.
                To begin to get at the ethical problem in rhetoric here, let’s do a brief rhetorical
           analysis of this memo from the standpoint of technical communication, argumenta-
           tion, and style. By any formal criteria in technical communication, it is an almost
           perfect document. It begins with what, in recent composition theories and technical
           writing practices, is known as the problem or “purpose statement.” According to J.
           C. Mathes and D. W. Stevenson, this statement should invoke an assumption or
         Katz   = The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric,   Technology, and the Holocaust   185


goal shared by the audience—here the statistic that 97,000 have been processed
without incident—and then introduce a fact that conflicts with that assumption or
goal—technical changes are needed—thereby effectively setting up the problem to
be solved (29-38; see also Olsen and Huckin, Principles 94-104). In keeping with
some of what today are recognized as the rules of good document design, the memo
is also divided into three numbered sections that are clearly demarcated by white
space for easy reading. And most importantly from the standpoint of technical writ-
ing, this recommendation for modifying the vehicles is technically accurate and log-
ically argued.
     Indeed, in this memo one can find many of the topoi first defined by Aristotle in
the Rhetoric (II, xxiii. 1397a6-xxiv. 1402a29) that are used to investigate any situa-
tion or problem and provide the material for enthymemic arguments. For example, in
the first section the writer uses the common topic of relationship: cause/effect argu-
ments, in conjunction with the topic of comparison (difference) and the topic of cir-
cumstance (the impossible), are used to investigate the problem of maximizing the
use of space, to refute the manufacturer’s claims that the problem is one of overload-
ing, and to conclude in an enthymeme that a reduction in the load space is necessary.
Just further supports his conclusion by cause/effect arguments embedded in the topic
of contraries that reducing the number of “pieces” loaded would extend operating
time because the empty space would have to be filled with carbon monoxide, while
reducing the load space would actually shorten the operating time. Finally, Just argues
by cause/effect and contraries to refute the manufacturer’s claim that reducing the
load space would overload the front axle by arguing from precedent (example) that
“the merchandise . . . displays during the operation a natural tendency to rush to the
rear doors, and is mainly found lying there at the end of the operation. So the front
axle is not overloaded.” Thus, in a series of enthymemes that make use of the topoi,
Just investigates and proves his case for a reduction in load space.
    But of course, this is not the problem with this memo. In fact, given the subject
matter, we might wish to claim that this memo          is too technical, too logical. The
writer shows no concern that the purpose of his memo is the modification of vehi-
cles not only to improve efficiency, but also to exterminate people. This is the ethi-
cal problem in rhetoric I wish to discuss. Here, as in most technical writing and, I
will argue, in most deliberative rhetoric, the focus is on expediency, on technical
criteria as a means to an end. But here expediency and the resulting ethos of objec-
tivity, logic, and narrow focus that characterize most technical writing, are taken to
extremes and applied to the mass destruction of human beings. Here, expediency is
an ethical end as well.
      This “ethos of expediency” can be seen in the style of Just’s memo, particularly
the euphemisms and metaphors used to denote, objectify, and conceal process and
people—“observations,” “load,” “pieces,” “operating time,” “merchandise,” “packed
solid,” “fluid liquid,” “large pieces of dirt”—as well as use of figures of speech such as
ellipsis (“97,000 have been processed”) and litotes (“alarming nature of the dark-
ness,” “displays a natural tendency to rush to the rear doors”). What concerns me
most here is how, based on an ethic of expediency, rhetoric was made to serve the
holocaust.
     It is well known that to perform well in a professional organization, writers must
adopt the ethos of that organization. Barring errors in translation or differences in
186   Chapter 4   =   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          language structure between German and English, the ethos of Just’s memo is created
          and supported by a grammatical style that Walker Gibson has labelled “stuffy”
          (90-101): the heavy use of polysyllabic words, modified nouns (“natural tendency,”
          “full capacity,” “sealed drain,” “fluid liquid,” “technical changes”), of a passive voice
          that obscures the role of the agent, and of subordinate clauses that separate subject
          from verb. As Gibson points out, in this style responsibility is shifted from the writer
          (and reader) to the organization they represent, the organization whose voice they
          now speak with, in whose interest they act, whose ethos they have totally adopted as
          their own. All the stylistic features | have pointed out communicate and reveal a
          “group think,” and officially sanctioned ethos grounded in expediency.
               Indeed, this brief analysis reflects the rhetorical problem with Just’s memo: it is
          based purely on an ethic of expediency. This claim at once corroborates and goes be-
          yond Hannah Arendt’s controversial conclusion that Eichmann, the inventor of “the
          final solution,” was not a psychopath but a bureaucrat simply doing his duty. For Just
          is not merely performing his function; in order to perform it effectively, he has
          adopted the ethos of the Nazi bureaucracy he works for as well. But in Nazi Germany,
          that ethos also involved an entire nation of people, a whole culture. Thus, I believe
          the ethical problem is even deeper and more widespread than the ethos of a single bu-
          reaucracy. In this paper | will attempt to show that what | have called an ethic of ex-
          pediency underlies technical writing and deliberative rhetoric (see Olsen and
          Huckin, Principles 70), and that this ethic, which is so predominant in Western cul-
          ture, was at least partially responsible for the holocaust.
               Thus it will be my contention that the ethical problem represented in Just’s memo
          to his superior, while an extreme case, is not an anomaly nor a problem in technical
          writing only, but a problem of deliberative rhetoric—defined by Aristotle as that genre
          of rhetoric concerned with deliberating future courses of action. I will argue that the
          ethic of expediency in Western culture which Aristotle first treated systematically in
          the Rhetoric, the Nicomachean Ethics, and especially the Politics, was rhetorically em-
          braced by the Nazi regime and combined with science and technology to form the
          “moral basis” of the holocaust. While there is a concern for ethics in the field of tech-
          nical communication, and while few in our society believe expediency is an adequate
          moral basis for making decisions, I will suggest that it is the ethic of expediency that
          enables deliberative rhetoric and gives impulse to most of our actions in technological
          capitalism as well, and I will explore some of the implications and dangers of a rhetoric
          grounded exclusively in an ethic of expediency. In doing so, I hope to mount a critique
          of the ethic of expediency that underlies technical communication and deliberative
          rhetoric, and by extension writing pedagogy and practice based on it.
               In “The Rhetoric of Hitler’s ‘Battle’”” Kenneth Burke has already demonstrated
          the importance of rhetorical analysis for understanding the source of Hitler’s power,
          and the significance of his misuse of the rhetoric of religion. However, despite Burke’s
          warning, we have tended to understand the holocaust from a nonrhetorical, Platonic
          standpoint, which amounts to a refusal to understand it at all. Sometimes this stand-
          point is justified. Elie Wiesel, for example, eloquently argues for the sacredness of the
          memory of the holocaust against the attempts to absorb it into popular culture and so
          trivialize it. But for Wiesel, and I would suggest, most people, the holocaust appears as
           a breach in the Platonic wall of Virtue, an aberration in Western civilization, and so
         Katz   =® The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric,   Technology,   and the Holocaust   187


lies outside human culture: “Auschwitz is something else, always something else. It is
a universe outside the universe, a creation that exists parallel to creation” (Wiesel 1).
In this Platonic realm of anti-Forms, the holocaust lies beyond rhetorical analysis.
For Wiesel and many other survivors and scholars, the holocaust can best be compre-
hended by the reverence of silence that surrounds a mystery.
     However, as George Steiner intimates throughout In Bluebeard’s Castle, the holo-
caust may not be so much a breach of the Platonic wall of Virtue, an aberration of
Western culture, as an outgrowth of it, the final development and manifestation of
something deeper and more problematic in Western civilization itself. In this view,
the holocaust falls under the purview of rhetoric. Although Steiner points to the
Platonic utopianism inherent in Western culture rather than to expediency as the
root of the holocaust, I will show that much of Hitler’s ethical and political program
is also directly or indirectly based on the ethic of expediency first treated by Aristotle,
and is thus amenable to analysis from an Aristotelian point of view. While I agree
with Wiesel’s argument against the trivialization of the holocaust through populariza-
tions and respect him immensely, an exclusively Platonic stance toward the holo-
caust prevents us from fully understanding how it happened, and from understanding
the relationship it reveals between rhetoric and ethics.



ETHICS IN DELIBERATIVE DISCOURSE: EXPEDIENCY
Let’s start with the issue of objectivity in technical writing. While the fallacy of the
objective stance in technical writing has been discussed extensively from an episte-
mological standpoint (see Miller, “Humanistic Rational”; Dobrin), it has not been
discussed enough from an ethical one. The concept of ethos in rhetoric might help us
here. In rhetorical theory, the role of ethos (“the moral element in character”) in en-
thymemic arguments has been demonstrated by William Grimaldi, for example, who,
interpreting Aristotle, argues that it is an essential link between deliberation and ac-
tion (144-51). Virtue for Aristotle involves choice informed and led by both intel-
lect and natural disposition or appetite (Nicomachean Ethics VI. Xii. 1143b16—xiii.
1145a14). Thus Grimaldi argues that while logos, or reason “considers the means nec-
essary” to reach some end in the deliberative rhetoric, it is pathos and ethos that pro-
vide the impetus to act.
    In this sense, ethics, defined as human character manifested in behavior, is an
important consideration in deliberative rhetoric. All deliberative rhetoric is con-
cerned with decision and action. Technical writing, perhaps even more than other
kinds of rhetorical discourse, always leads to action, and thus always impacts on hu-
man life; in technical writing, epistemology necessarily leads to ethics. The problem
in technical communication and deliberative rhetoric generally, then, is not only
one of epistemology, the relationship of argument, organization, and style to
thought, but also one of ethics, of how that relationship affects and reveals itself in
human behavior.
     It is easy to see how the epistemology of objectivity would lead to an ethic of ex-
pediency (or how the ethic of expediency would lead to an epistemology of objectiv-
ity) in so far as the viewing subject and the viewed object are technical means to
188   Chapter 4    ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          some “higher” end—that is, “truth.” But even discussions-based on the principals of
          problem statements, audience adaptation, and rhetorical argumentation—upon
          which the more sophisticated teaching (and practice) in technical writing as well as
          thetoric are based—only begin to get at the fundamental issue that thrusts itself upon
          our attention in Just’s memo. As we will see, based on the ethic of expediency that
          underlies not only technical writing and rhetoric but also most behavior in Western
          civilization (see Olsen and Huckin, Principles 70), those same principles were used to
          form the “moral” basis of Nazi society, to create the ethos of that entire culture, and to
          provide the necessary warrant for the holocaust. As Olsen and Huckin suggest in the
          second edition of their textbook (Technical Writing 40-41; 91-94), we need to con-
          sider technical writing based on deliberative rhetoric from the standpoint of both
          thetoric and ethics.
               From the debates between the sophists and Plato to present-day criticism of ad-
          vertising and political propaganda, there has always been an uneasy relationship be-
          tween rhetoric and ethics. Perhaps nowhere is that relationship more clearly
           treated—and the strain more evident—than in Aristotle’s Rhetoric. In the Rhetoric,
           Aristotle states that “rhetoric is a combination of the science of logic and of the ethi-
           cal branch of politics” (1. Iv. 135b10)—of logic and ethics. According to Aristotle,
           then, ethics in political discourse is a matter of Goodness as well as Utility. However,
           in his discussion of deliberative discourse in the Rhetoric, Aristotle elides Goodness
           and Utility: “the political or deliberative orator’s aim,” he says, “is utility: delibera-
           tion seeks to determine not ends, but means to ends, i.e., what it is most useful to do”
           (I. vi. 1362a17-20).
                  In the Rhetoric Aristotle thus seems to collapse all ethical questions in delibera-
           tive discourse into a question of expediency. As he says, “all other points, such as
           whether the proposal is just or unjust, honourable or dishonourable, he [the political
           orator] brings in as subsidiary and relative to this main consideration” (I. iii.
           1358b23—25). Nan Johnson argues that it did not seem to matter much to Aristotle
           whether the ends of deliberative rhetoric were ultimately just or unjust, true or false,
           as long as the means were expedient. However, several scholars have argued that
           Aristotle’s conception of rhetoric as praxis (social action) is not amoral, but rather
           ethical insofar as praxis involves phronesis (practical wisdom or prudence) as an end in
           itself (see Sullivan 377-78; Kallendorf and Kallendorf 55-57; Rowland and
           Womack). But it is precisely because rhetoric is a practical art rather than a theoreti-
           cal science, one located in praxis, in the contingent realm of action, that deliberative
           thetoric can be understood to be primarily based on an ethic of expediency. If praxis
           depends on phronesis, on the practical wisdom or prudence of the speaker to reason
           about “the good,” that wisdom, that prudence, is itself a means to an end, that end
           being praxis.
                 Further, as Dale L. Sullivan points out, “the good,” and thus what counts as prac-
           tical wisdom or prudence, is defined by society (378). Thus phronesis, like ethical ap-
           peal for Aristotle (Rhetoric I. Ix. Esp. 1367b10), can also be considered an expedient,
           a means to an end of rhetoric as praxis—determining the “right” course of action in
           the first case, finding the available means          of persuasion in the second.   (Eugene
           Garver, however, argues that this understanding of phronesis depends on whether one
           defines it as “prudence,” which is rooted in character as an end in itself, or as “practi-
           cal reason,” which is detached from character in modern political thought and thus
         Katz   * The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric, Technology,    and the Holocaust   189


more “technical” [xi]. But as I will show, prudence, like virtue itself, can be redefined
by society, become a means to another end, as was the case in Nazi Germany.) In
Aristotle’s treatment of deliberative rhetoric, then, expediency seems to become an
ethical end in itself. Expediency is always the good—“utility is a good think”
Aristotle says (I. vi. 1362a20), concluding: “any end is a good” (I. vi. 1363a5). This is
a conclusion which, in light of the holocaust, we may want to reconsider. For follow-
ing Aristotle, in deliberative discourse, including technical communication, we are
in the habit of giving expediency too much free reign.
     In fact, most technical communication is deliberative. (Indeed, in a scientific
and technological society, much deliberative discourse is technical.) As Olsen and
Huckin teach, technical writing is concerned both with arguments of fact and argu-
ments of policy—with what should or should not be done (Principles 67). But as they
also point out, since most technical communication is deliberative, it is based primar-
ily on arguments of expediency rather than worth or goodness (Principles 70). What
Aristotle gives us in the Rhetoric, then, is a practical ethic for technical writing and
deliberative discourse, an ethic based almost exclusively on expediency. Most argu-
ments of worth and goodness, if they are present at all, are subsumed under expedi-
ency, becoming another means to a desired end, becoming expedient in themselves
(like appeals to give to charity based on the advantage of a tax break).
     However, Aristotle’s treatment of ethics is not as simple as that. Alasdair
MacIntyre argues that in Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics the relationship between
means and ends is ambiguous (148). On the one hand, it does seem that for Aristotle
virtue is a means to an end, that end being happiness. In the Nicomachean Ethics
Aristotle says that “Happiness . . . is something final and self-sufficient, and is the end
of action” (I. vii. 1097b21; see also X. vi. 1176a30-viii. 1179a34). It is not erroneous,
says MacIntyre, to see that in positing “the good” as the telos or goal of human life
and defining that telos as happiness or pleasure, Aristotle renders happiness the ideal
object of all virtue (148). In fact, G. E. R. Lloyd suggests that Aristotle waxes posi-
tively Platonic in his discussion of happiness (239).
     On the other hand, according to MacIntyre, Aristotle does not clearly separate
means and ends as we do. MacIntyre argues that in Aristotle’s teleological philoso-
phy, happiness as “the good” is not only an end of virtue but a part of virtue, the re-
sult of virtue as an activity of the soul: “The enjoyment which Aristotle identifies is
that which characteristically accompanies the achievement of excellence in activity”
(160). Lloyd too points out that there is no ideal form of the Good as such, but rather
individual goods associated with particular activities or subjects (208-13). Thus, says
Maclatyre, “the enjoyment of itself provides us with no good reason for embarking
upon one type of activity rather than another” (160).
    Further, if there is no ideal form of the Good, virtue (like knowledge without the
ideal form of Truth) is communal in nature, and is at least partially determined by the
society in which one lives. That is, virtue, like knowledge, is socially constructed,
culturally relative, an awareness of a condition of our civilization from which, as
Steiner laments, there is no turning after the holocaust (59-93). In fact, according to
MacIntyre, virtue was not a matter of individual moral authority for Aristotle, as it is
for us, but was always directed toward and made possible by the polis (148-64). Thus,
MacIntyre suggests, it is probably incorrect to consider happiness or pleasure the telos
of human life for Aristotle; rather, it was the excellence of activity (160).
190   Chapter 4   #® Professional Writing as Ethical Action



               And of course, the highest activity resulting in supreme happiness was philo-
          sophical contemplation. For Aristotle, the reason for the polis to exist is to make pos-
          sible the pursuit of excellence and the happiness that is concomitant with it (Ethics I.
          ii. 1094a20-1094b10; Politics VII). Indeed, to reduce MacIntyre’s thesis to its simplest
          terms, the decline of both the philosophy of ethics and of virtue itself is marked by
          the breakdown in Western culture of a communal teleology and the shift to an indi-
          vidual moral authority and utilitarianism that can be seen, for instance,        in the
          philosophies of Nietzsche and Bentham (MacIntyre 62-78; 256-63). This last point
          may be important when we consider some of the implications for rhetoric of the ethic
          of expediency in a capitalistic culture.
               Thus, although the roots of totalitarianism have been perceived in Aristotle’s
          conception of the polis as well as in Plato’s conception of the republic (see Popper
           1-26), and the darker side of the Greek polis itself has come under some scrutiny from
          rhetorical quarters (Miller, “Polis”), we may wish to locate the ethic of expediency
          that culminated in the holocaust not in Aristotle’s corpus, but rather in the trace of
          subsequent history. For if MacIntyre is correct, not only Aristotle’s concept of ethics
          but virtue itself has “deteriorated” under the pressure of individualism and the utili-
          tarianism that individualism gives rise to. In any case, it is important to understand
          how the ethic of expediency that evolved in Western culture and underlies most de-
          liberative discourse also at least partly formed the moral basis of the holocaust. And
          Aristotle’s treatises can provide a clear point of reference.
               It is not my purpose in this article to establish a direct connection between
          Aristotle and Hitler. There is little evidence in Mein Kampf to suggest that Hitler ac-
          tually read Aristotle either when he “studied” in Vienna or while he was an inmate at
          Landsberg Prison, where he wrote Mein Kampf, although he almost certainly read or
          had secondhand knowledge of the work of Plato, as well as Fitche, Nietzsche (see
          Mein Kampf 579-81n.), and other German philosophers and historians (see Shirer
          142-64). Indeed, in his early days in Vienna, Hitler “was a voracious reader” (Shirer
          40), and throughout his life possessed a keen if selective passion for political writing
          and biographies of powerful leaders (see Shirer 1439). But it is my belief that Hitler,
          like those around him (see Speer 246), was at least familiar with Aristotle’s work, es-
          pecially the Politics. Machiavelli, Renaissance statesman, student of politics, and au-
           thor of Hitler’s “bedtime reading” (Gauss 8), almost certainly was (cf. Garver).
                But it is crucial that we examine Hitler in conjunction with Aristotle’s Rhetoric,
          Nichomachean Ethics, and Politics to see how Hitler used the ethic of expediency
          thetorically to create a “moral” warrant for Nazi action. To do so, it will be necessary
          to turn to Hitler’s writings, speeches and conversations (as collected, edited, and in
          some cases translated for the first time in the short but incisive Hitler by George H.
          Stein). For it is in his writings, speeches, and conversations that Hitler lays bare not
          only his political program, but the ethic of expediency that guided it.


          HITLER’S “ETHICAL” PROGRAM?
          Although the characterization seems hard to swallow, Hitler’s was an “ethical” pro-
          gram in the broadest sense of that term. As Stein writes in a prefatory remark, “In
          Mein Kampf, Hitler set down clearly and systematically his principles for political
          Katz    =   The Ethic of Expediency:        Classical Rhetoric,     Technology,   and the Holocaust   191


action” (45). Indeed, in Mein Kampf Hitler asks: “Can spiritual ideas be extermi-
nated by the sword? Can ‘philosophies’ be combated by the use of brute force?” (51)!
If Aristotle maintains in the Nicomachean Ethics (VI. xii. 1143b16-xiii.                      1145al4)
that “practical wisdom” must be accompanied by “moral virtue” to supply the right
end, that “it is not possible to be good in the strict sense without practical wisdom,
nor practically wise without being good” (VI. xiii. 1144b30), Hitler maintains that
the application of technique and power must be based on a “spiritual idea,” a philos-
ophy, to be successful. Hitler understood—all too well—that his political program
for world war and mass extermination would not be accepted without a moral foun-
dation. While “the continuous and steady application of the methods for repressing
a doctrine, etc., makes it possible for a plan to succeed,” Hitler proclaims, “this per-
sistence . . . can always and only arise from a definite spiritual conviction. Any vio-
lence which does not spring from a firm, spiritual base, will be wavering and uncer-
tain. It lacks the stability which can only rest in a fanatical outlook” (52).
     For Hitler, as for Aristotle—at least in his discussion of deliberative rhetoric—
there seems to be no distinction between “practical wisdom” and “moral virtue,” be-
tween expediency and the good, as long as rhetoric serves its end, that is, the State.
Thus Hitler asserts: “Conceptions or ideas, as well as movements with a definite spir-
itual foundation, regardless of whether the latter is false or true, can, after a certain
point in their development, only be broken with technical instruments of power if
these physical weapons are at the same time the support of a new kindling thought,
idea, or philosophy” (51). In Hitler’s rhetoric, expediency is the necessary good that
subsumes all other goods, and becomes the basis of virtue itself.
     And depending on how one interprets the word “support” in the previous quota-
tion, there were two possible ways in which expediency might become the basis of
virtue for Hitlez: politically and technologically. In the first interpretation, “support”
can be read to mean that the technical instruments of power must be used in the ser-
vice of (must implement and enforce) a new political philosophy. In the second in-
terpretation, “support” can be read to mean that the technical instruments of power
must themselves become the basis of (must embody and engender) a new “technolog-
ical philosophy.” In other words, for Hitler there seem to be two kinds of expediency
that can be used to supplant an existing morality: political expediency, motivated by
a “concern” for the State (at least ostensibly), and technological expediency, moti-
vated by technology itself.
     Thus, to see how Hitler “takes” the Aristotelian notion of expediency and com-
bines it with technology to create a new moral order, it is useful to make a distinction
here between expediency based on politics and expediency based on technology. |
have already mentioned that for Aristotle, if the end or “good” in deliberative dis-
course is political expediency, the function of the “ideal” state is to supply the mater-
ial means necessary to secure “happiness” and the “good life” for its citizens—their
moral and intellectual development. These material means included enough people
and land to be self-sufficient (Politics VII. iv. 1326a5—v. 1327a10), a defense against
enemies, both external and internal, both in the present and in the future (V; VII. vi.
1327 all-1327b15; xi. 1330b35-1331al7), and a large slave class (I. v. 1254a18-vi.


1 All page numbers following Hitler quotations are from Hitler by George H. Stein.
192   Chapter 4   ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          1255b15; VII. ix. 1328b25—x. 1330a34). (Based on the ethic of expediency, it also in-
          cluded killing deformed children or mandatory abortion to control the population of
          the state! [Politics VII. xvi. 1335b20-28].)
               Hitler almost seems to put Aristotle’s observations into practice. In his political
          speeches and writing, Hitler continually proclaimed the political (i-e., “ethical”)
          need and practical utility of conquering Europe and enslaving its farmer peasants,
          turning Russia into “Germany’s India” (63), and exterminating the Jews and other
          “inferior, subhuman species” in order to eradicate “social disease” and facilitate the
          moral, material, and intellectual development of the German people. In Hitler’s ora-
          tory and mind run amok, the Final Solution was necessary because neither exile nor
          quarantine of the Jews could guarantee the purity, safety, and well-being of the
          Aryan race.
              But Hitler unfortunately also understood that the moral grounds for war and
          mass extermination could be rhetorically founded on science and technology them-
          selves. Science and technology as moral expedients could be used to generate a “new
          philosophy,” a “spiritual foundation,” a “fanatical outlook.” There was the belief in
          genetic hygiene and Germanic superiority grounded in racial biology as well as nat-
          ural selection (see Proctor). But in addition, grounded in the ethic of expediency,
          “the technical instruments of power” themselves, “the physical weapons” as well as
          the political program they served, also could be the rhetorical basis of the spiritual el-
          ement.
              In Nazi Germany (and | will suggest, in our own culture) science and technology
          become the basis of a powerful ethical argument for carrying out any program.
          Science and technology embody the ethos of objective detachment and truth, of
          power and capability, and thus the logical and ethical necessity (what Winner has
          called the “technological imperative” [Autonomous 100—06]) for their own existence
           and use. Sullivan arrives at a similar conclusion (379). But in Just’s argument for
           technical improvements to the gassing vans, we see the technological imperative at
           its worst. Technological expediency actually subsumes political expediency and be-
           comes an end in itself. Progress becomes a virtue at any cost.
                Thus, the theoretical distinction I just made between technological and political
           expediency breaks down in practice. Technology is political (see Winner, “Artifacts”;
           Autonomous). Both technology and politics can become the basis of ethics; both lead
           to power. But technology can become the basis of political as well. Based on what we
           now know about the holocaust, there can be no doubt that Hitler believed in the ef-
           ficacy of science and technology, no matter how perverted, as the basis of ethics and
           politics. “A movement like ours mustn’t let itself be drawn into metaphysical digres-
           sions.” Hitler states; “It must stick to the spirit of exact science” (69).
                The result: Just’s memo. Mass extermination. Horrible biological and technologi-
           cal experiments on those considered subhuman. A cold-blooded methodology the
           standard for dealing with the Jews, as well as with the conquered. A cold-blooded
           method the ethos of an entire country. Gas chambers replacing vans, systematically
           “processing” hundreds of thousands of “pieces” a day. New and improved methods for
           administering pain and eliminating people. The whole society organized into a death
           machine for the efficient extirpation of millions, lauded by the Nazis as a hallmark of
           organization, elegance, efficiency, speed, all of which became ends in themselves for
           those planning and those executing the procedures.
         Katz   ®   The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric,   Technology,   and the Holocaust   193


    For Hitler, technological expediency served to make mass extermination seem
not only necessary, but just and honorable: “every persecution which occurs without
a spiritual base seems morally unjustified,” says Hitler (51-52). It is the ethic of tech-
nological expediency that we sense in the memo by Just to the SS—if we sense any
ethic at all. Underlying the objectivity, detachment, and narrow focus of this memo
(and of Nazi rhetoric in general) is an assurance that the writer’s “action” is technically
justified and correct, and thus morally right, an assurance that is grounded not in the
arrogance of a personal belief in one’s superiority, but rather in a cultural and ethical
form of technology as well as Party. The ethic of technological expediency that un-
derlies this memo and constitutes its ethos at least in part provided the warrant that
propelled Nazi Germany into the forefront of war and of infamy. Perhaps this ethic
can explain the cold logic with which Just addresses the gassing of innocent people.
Perhaps the ethic—as well as apathy, and fear, and hatred—can explain the complic-
ity of millions.



THE TECHNOLOGICAL                   ETHOS AND NAZI RHETORIC
To further understand how the ethic of expediency based on technology partially
formed the moral basis of the holocaust, and to begin to realize the implications of
this for rhetoric, it would be useful to understand the ethos of technology a little
more, how rhetoric was used to create it, and what its effect on rhetoric was. While I
don’t mean to suggest this is the “final answer” to that question murmured so many
times before—how could the holocaust have happened?—the imperatives of science
and technology as moral expedients create a powerful ethos that may partly explain
what occurred. As Jacques Ellul discusses at length in The Technological Society,
technology, the embodiment in techniques and procedures as well as machines of sci-
entific method, becomes its own raison d’etre and driving force in culture. Technology
becomes both a means and an end in itself.
     In addition, Jurgen Habermas argues that in late industrial capitalism, technolog-
ical values do indeed subsume political/economic ones, and that this “purposive-
rational subsystem” of industrial capitalism quietly usurps the “traditional-institu-
tional framework” of social customs, values, and beliefs (90-107). That is, a “techno-
logical rationality” that calculates the value of everything in terms of its own techni-
cal criteria and use (and that drives postmodern economics, for example), supplants
and replaces the traditional values of the society. In Just’s memo, we see that techni-
cal improvements to the vans become the only criteria necessary to consider.
     Obviously, “technological rationality” is based on expediency. Unlike honor or
justice, which are based on higher, more abstract moral principles, expediency is the
only “technical” ethic, perhaps the only ethic that “pure rationality” knows. (Stein
even calls Hitler a “teligious rationalist” [67].) With expediency, the only ethical cri-
terion necessary is the perceptible movement toward the technical goal to be
achieved—including expediency itself. Indeed, expediency is the only ethic that can
be “measured,” whether that measure be a cost-benefit analysis employed by an indus-
trial engineer to argue for the automation of a plant, or the number of people exter-
minated in one day—“pure” expediency (undiluted and uninhibited by other ethics)
recognizes no boundaries, no degrees of morality or other ethical limits. While expe-
194   Chapter 4   ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          diency can be the basis of desire and emotion (like greed.or the lust for power), the
          ethic of expediency is an exclusively logical, systematic, even quantifiable one, can
          lead to a rationality grounded in no other ethic but its own, and is symptomatic of a
          highly scientific, technological age.
               And of course, technology is the embodiment of pure expediency. Thus, “the
          spiritual element,” the ethos of technology, is expediency: rationality, efficiency,
          speed, productivity, power. It is in this way that technology creates the “ethical ap-
          peal” I mentioned earlier. Both science and technology are “a good” not only because
          they are a rational means for accomplishing a task and/or achieving leisure and thus
          happiness (the virtues heard most in regard to scientific and technological progress),
          but because they are ethical ends in themselves as well. As Carolyn Miller points out,
          the ethos of technology can even become a form of consciousness (see “Technology”).
          And as Heidegger expounds, the essence of science and technology is “enframing,” a
          manifestation and mode of perception and of being that arrests, objectifies, turns
          everything into a “standing-reserve” for use (14-49).
               In Nazi Germany, where gold fillings were extracted from the teeth of the victims
          of the gas chambers and melted down and the hair of victims was used “in the war ef-
          fort,” we see the ethic of expediency taken to extremes. Germans under Nazi rule
          were an efficient people of an industrious nation who totally lost themselves in the
          ethos of technology. The holocaust reminds us not only of the potential brutality and
          inhumanity of the ethic of expediency, but of a rationality taken to such extremes
          that it becomes madness.
               How did this ethos come about? If Hitler used the ethic of expediency as first
          treated in Aristotle’s Politics as part of the moral basis of his political program (signifi-
          cantly, his fervent appeals to the “Platonic” right of the Third Reich were the other
          part), he used the ethic of expediency first treated in Aristotle’s Rhetoric to create the
          technological ethos of Nazi consciousness and culture. Based on that ethic of expedi-
          ency, Hitler can be understood to have turned Aristotle’s concept of deliberative
          rhetoric inside out, exploiting the ethic of expediency that underlies and enables it
          and essentially turning deliberative rhetoric against itself. To understand how Hitler
          perverted Aristotle’s concept of deliberative rhetoric to create the ethos of Nazi
          Germany, we must look more closely at Hitler’s conception of rhetoric.
               We have seen that Just’s memo is based purely on expediency; the memo itself is
          a technical instrument (like the vans themselves) for carrying out the organizational
          “task.” I have also already pointed out how in Aristotle’s conception of deliberative
          rhetoric, expediency seems to be the primary virtue. Deliberative rhetoric is expedi-
          ent when it serves its end, that is, political persuasion. The test of success in
          Aristotelian rhetoric is in the persuasion of the audience (the so-called “audience cri-
           terion”). As “the art or faculty of observing in any given case the available means of
          persuasion” (Rhetoric I. ii. 1355b26), then, rhetoric could be considered a means to an
          end, an expedient, a techne (although as Grimaldi and others have shown, for
          Aristotle it was much more than this; for Aristotle rhetoric was also an episteme or
          faculty for discovering social knowledge).
               Hitler takes the ethic of expediency underlying deliberative rhetoric to its logical
           extreme. For Hitler, propaganda, the truest form of “technical rhetoric,” replaced de-
           liberative discourse as the preferred mode of communicating with the masses:
         Katz   = The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the Holocaust       195


    The function of propaganda does not lie in the scientific training of the individual, but in
    calling the masses’ attention to certain facts, processes, necessities, etc., whose signifi-
    cance is thus for the first time placed within their field of vision.
        The whole art consists in doing this so skillfully that everyone will be convinced that
    the fact is real, the process necessary, the necessity correct, etc. (46)
                               $


     Based on the ethic of expediency, rhetoric for Hitler was pure technique, de-
signed not to encourage debate, but rather to indoctrinate: “all effective propaganda
must be limited to a very few points and must harp on these slogans until the last
member of the public understands what you want him to understand by your slogan”;
the reason, Hitler adds, is that “As soon as you sacrifice this slogan and try to be
many-sided, the effect will piddle away, for the crowd can neither digest nor retain
the material offered. In this way the result is weakened and the end entirely cancelled
out” (47). Even in these abbreviated quotations we see not only a greater (political?)
distrust of the masses than we find in Aristotle (Rhetoric I. ii. 1357a5), but also a
greater “technical” preoccupation with the end to be achieved, both of which tend to
work against free discussion, true deliberation.
      In fact, founded on the ethic of expediency and taken to extremes, rhetoric itself
becomes a kind of technology, an instrument and an embodiment of the end that it
serves. In Mein Kampf Hitler asks, “Is propaganda a means or an end? It is a means,
and must therefore be judged with regard to its end. It must consequently take a form
calculated to support the aim which it serves” (45). In Nazi Germany, propaganda
served the function of creating the technological/political basis for the new order,
which, given the ethic of expediency, becomes the moral basis for it as well. As Hitler
states, “The first task of propaganda is to win people for subsequent organization; the
first task of organization is to win men for the continuation of propaganda. The sec-
ond task of propaganda is the disruption of the existing state of affairs and the perme-
ation of this state of affairs with the new doctrine” (49).
     Propaganda thus served to create the technical ethos of Nazi consciousness and
culture: rationality, efficiency, speed, productivity, power. In fact, as a technology,
propaganda itself embodies this ethos, actually becomes personified in Hitler’s
rhetoric as existing for those ends only. If Aristotle observes that deliberative dis-
course is based on questions of expediency rather than just or honor, Hitler declares
that “The function of propaganda is... not to weigh and ponder the rights of differ-
ent people, but exclusively to emphasize the one right which it has set out to argue
for. Its task is not to make an objective study of the truth, in so far as it favors the en-
emy, and then set it before the masses with academic fairness; its task is to serve our
own right, always and unflinchingly” (47).
    For Hitler, this technical ethos was necessary to create the rhetorical/moral basis
for the violence and brutality to which he incited the German masses. If Aristotle ob-
serves that for political orators “all other points, such as whether the proposal is just
or unjust, honourable or dishonourable, are subsidiary and relative and have little
place in deliberative discourse. ... [W]hether it is not unjust for a city to enslave its
innocent neighbors often eae, not trouble them at all” (Rhetoric I. iii. 135b25;
1358b35), Hitler insists that in questions of political struggle, “all considerations of
humanitarianism or aesthetics crumble to nothingness . . .” (45).
196   Chapter 4   ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



               Finally, if the purpose of Hitler’s propaganda was to instill in the German people
          an ethos of detachment and power by which the Aryan race would build the Third
          Reich, as leader of this race Hitler sought to embody this ethos himself: “the masses
          love a commander more than a petitioner and feel inwardly more satisfied by a doc-
          trine, tolerating no other beside itself . . .” (42-44). If ethical appeal, the most impor-
          tant of the three appeals for Aristotle (Rhetoric I. ii. 1356a4), is created when the
          speaker convinces the audience that he or she possesses sound sense, high moral
          character, and good will (II. i. 1378a9), Hitler redefines these ethical categories based
          on the ethic of expediency, reducing them to their basest, “technical” level. In the
          ethical system Hitler rhetorically created for “the master race,” sound sense is reduced
          to expediency, high moral character is reduced to courage to use brutal force, and
          good will is reduced to “benevolent violence” against those considered inferior:
          “When I think about it, I realize that I’m extraordinarily humane. . . . | restrict myself
          to telling them they must go away. If they break their pipes on the journey, | can’t do
          anything about it. But if they refuse to go voluntarily, | see no other solution but ex-
          termination” (72).
                In word and act, Hitler created an ethos of expediency in order to carry out his
          pogrom for the greater good of Germany: “The people at all times see the proof of
          their own right in ruthless attack on a foe, and to them renouncing the destruction
          of the adversary seems like uncertainty with regard to their own right if not a sign of
          their own unright” (50). It was an ethos that Hitler thought necessary for the
          German people to embrace and adopt as well: “Close your hearts to pity. Act bru-
          tally. Eighty million people must obtain what is their right. Their existence must be
          made secure . . .” (76).
                It is clear that Hitler combined the ethic of expediency embedded in rhetoric
          with technology to create the ethos of Nazi Germany. That is, Hitler used technologi-
          cal expediency to create the polis necessary to carry out world war and mass extermi-
          nation. In addition, the ethic of expediency then served as the telos—“the will to
          power”—of that polis. It is therefore also clear that the telos within a polis is not uni-
           versal but socially constructed and relative, and renders ethics that are based on and
           serve them relative as well. MacIntyre too recognizes this (159). In fact, if we under-
           stand Aristotle’s acceptance of slavery as a reflection of “the blindness” of his culture
           (MacIntyre 159), then perhaps we can also understand the holocaust as a reflection
           of “the blindness” of Nazi culture as well—a political and technological blindness de-
           liberately created in and through rhetoric.
                This is in no way meant to diminish or forgive the profound tragedy of the holo-
           caust. Nor is it meant to devalue rhetoric. Rather, it is to bring home the significance
           of the holocaust for our understanding of the essential relationship between rhetoric
           and ethics. In considering that relationship, we must always look at rhetoric in the
           context of historical, political, social, and economic conditions which govern the na-
           ture of and use of rhetoric in culture. In Just’s memo to the SS we clearly see the view
           of human beings that can result when technology becomes an ethos, when a polis em-
           braces a “pure” ethic of expediency as its telos. To understand the holocaust from a
           rhetorical point of view is to understand the extreme limits and inherent dangers of
           the prevailing ethic of expediency as ideology in a highly scientific and technological
           society, and how deliberative rhetoric can be subverted and made to serve it.
        Katz   =® The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the Holocaust   197


EXPEDIENCY IN TECHNOLOGICAL CAPITALISM:
THE “FINAL PROBLEM” FOR US
Having said this, I think it is important in the conclusion of this paper to briefly ex-
plore the implications of the ethic of expediency manifested in Nazi Germany for
thetoric in our capitalistic culture. Certainly, our polis is as different from Nazi
Germany’s as Nazi Germany’s was from ancient Greece’s. While the telos of the an-
cient Greek polis was the intellectual development of the mind (for its few “citizens”
anyway), the telos of the Nazi polis was the development of the power of the State it-
self, as embodied in technology, Party, and Fiihrer. And while the polis in both an-
cient Greece and Nazi Germany can be understood to have had a communal telos—
the development of the State (though for different ends)—the telos of our polis is
understood to be the individual. Individualism is the basis of both democracy and
capitalism.
      I said earlier that MacIntyre believes that Aristotle’s concept of ethics and virtue
itself have “deteriorated” under the pressure of individualism and the utilitarian ethic
that individualism spawned. As MacIntyre suggests, we probably can’t understand
happiness as Aristotle did. We may not understand Aristotle’s concept of expediency
either. Whether ethics have actually “deteriorated” or not, with the shift in moral au-
thority from the State to the individual, personal happiness has become the goal of
life in the United States. And that happiness has come to be defined primarily in
economic terms. | think it can be asserted without too much argument that the telos
of life in the United States is economic progress. In the United States, success and
happiness, both personal and communal, are measured in monetary terms. In a capi-
talistic culture, it is “economic expediency” that drives most behavior.
      Further, that expediency is both political and technological. I have already men-
tioned how Habermas believes that in postindustrial societies technological and po-
litical values unite and subjugate the traditional values of those societies with a tech-
nological rationality that calculates the worth of everything in terms of its own
“technical” aims. In our capitalistic society, economic rationality, facilitated by and
dedicated to the development of new technologies, is one manifestation of this. The
danger, then, is that technological expediency in the guise of free enterprise can be-
come de facto both a means and an end. That is, in our culture, the danger is that
technological expediency (unlike happiness for Aristotle, which appears to be only a
part and result of virtue) can become the only basis of happiness, can become a virtue
itself, and so subsume all ethics under it, making all ethics expedients and thus re-
placing them. According to Habermas, this has already occurred.
      The ethic of expediency in extremis and combined with technology underlies the
rhetoric of Just’s memo to the SS and the holocaust in general. But to some extent,
technological (i.e., economic) expediency is the “moral” basis of many decisions/ac-
tions in our society that sometimes harm human welfare or imperil human life. A re-
cent example would be the decision not to notify the public of the bomb threat to
Pan Am Airlines to keep the airlines operating; in December 1988, Pan Am Flight
103 from London to New York exploded over Locherbee, Scotland, killing all two
hundred and seventy people on board. Ethically speaking, the difference is only one
of degree, not kind. The decision not to notify the public was a “systems decision,”
198   Chapter 4   #   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          concerned more with the “efficient” operation of the transportation system than with
          the people the system is supposed to serve. In any highly bureaucratic, technological,
          capitalistic society, it is often the human being who must adapt to the system which
          has been developed to perform a specific function, and which is thus always necessar-
          ily geared toward the continuance of its own efficient operation (see Winner,
          Autonomous, especially 238-48). In a capitalistic society, technological expediency
          often takes precedence over human convenience, and sometimes even human life.
               Now, I am not saying that science and technology are inherently fascist, or that
          we are becoming like the Nazis. Nor am I saying that expediency is all bad. It can be
          and is used to argue for increased safety or to otherwise enhance human welfare.
          What I am saying, however, is that expediency as we understand it in our culture in
          the twentieth century, as a technological end in itself, is problematic. The ethic of
          expediency that provides the moral base of deliberative discourse used to make deci-
          sions, weigh consequences, and argue results in every department of society, also re-
          sulted in the holocaust—a result that raises serious and fundamental questions for
          thetoric. (This is especially important when so many of our decisions, so much of our
          discourse, both public and professional, is technical in nature, and is therefore most
          likely to be dominated by the ethic of expediency.)
               If technology can become a form of consciousness, as Miller suggests, and tech-
          nological expediency in the guise of economic rationality can become our telos, then
          deliberative rhetoric—devoted to the use of reasoned debate to arrive at informed
          consensus and decisions in a democracy—could become nearly impossible, at least as
          far as technological/political issues are concerned. Although in “Rhetoric of Decision
          Science” Miller holds up deliberative rhetoric as a form of reasoning that is opposed
          to decision science—a technique based on technological rationality that is used to
          make managerial decisions by quantifying all the variables—we have seen that based
          on the ethic of expediency that underlies and enables it, deliberative rhetoric can be
          made to serve exclusively the technological interests of “the State.” Although not a
          decision “science,” deliberative rhetoric could become technological, replacing the
          democratic decision-making process with techniques of persuasion and audience adap-
          tation calculated to serve their own end only. Some would argue it already has.
                Although I can’t explore it here, there are many parallels between Hitler’s propa-
          ganda techniques and contemporary political campaigns and commercial advertising in
          the United States. Rhetoric, especially the “rhetoric of science and technology,” is in-
          creasingly being called upon and used to make or justify decisions based on technologi-
          cal expediency—to create the necessary technological ethos for accepting actions or
          events, especially in military procurement and operations, and in the management of
          risky technologies such as hazardous waste disposal facilities or nuclear power plants.
                The question for us is: do we, as teachers and writers and scholars, contribute to
          this ethos by our writing theory, pedagogy, and practice when we consider techniques
          of document design, audience adaptation, argumentation, and style without also con-
          sidering ethics? Do our methods, for the sake of expediency, themselves embody and
          impart the ethic of expediency? If telos is politically constructed and ethics are cultur-
          ally relative, we must realize the role our rhetoric plays in continually creating, recre-
          ating, and maintaining not only knowledge, but values as well—including the value
          of technological expediency—through how we teach rhetoric, and how we use it.
         Katz   = The Ethic of Expediency:   Classical Rhetoric,   Technology,   and the Holocaust   199


      And if we do contribute to this ethos, what can we do to counter it? We can begin
by recognizing the essentially ethical character of all rhetoric, including our writing
theory, pedagogy, and practice, and the role that expediency plays in rhetoric. We no
longer have the luxury of considering ethics outside the realm of rhetoric, as in the
Platonic model of knowledge, for the holocaust casts serious doubt upon this model.
And Aristotle’s division of ethics in rhetoric according to audience and function (de-
liberative, forensic, epideictic), is appealingly useful but problematic and ultimately
limited. For based on that division, and the ethic of expediency in deliberative
rhetoric under which we have operated, Aristotle does not seem to consider other
ethics, such as honor and justice (or kindness and humility) important in deliberative
discourse—at least not for their own sake.
      In the gruesome light of the holocaust, then, we should question whether expedi-
ency should be the primary ethical standard in deliberative discourse, including sci-
entific and technical communication, and whether, based on Cicero’s advocacy of a
rhetoric grounded in a knowledge of everything and Quintilian’s definition of the or-
ator as “a good ‘man’ skilled in speaking,” we can and should teach the whole
panoply of ethics in deliberative discourse in our rhetoric and writing courses. We
could start with Just’s memo. Perhaps we should even begin to question whether
“happiness”—as we understand it in our individualistic and utilitarian culture, as per-
sonal or corporate gain grounded in economic progress—should be the only basis of
virtue and the primary goal of human life. For when expediency becomes an end in
itself or is coupled with personal or political or corporate or scientific or technologi-
cal goals that are not also and ultimately rooted in humanitarian concerns, as is often
the case, ethical problems arise. (Of course, this presumes that we can define and
agree upon what these “humanitarian concerns” are—a presumption which is not at
all certain, given the “true” relativity of values, the multiplicity of needs, and the cur-
rent climate of personal and corporate greed.)
    But I trust we can agree that Hitler’s rhetoric, politics, and ethics are not based
on “humanitarian concerns.” | also hope we can agree that Hitler’s rhetoric, politics,
and ethics are not only based on insane hatred and racial prejudice, but also on the
ethic of expediency carried to extremes and unchecked by any other ethical con-
cerns, on science, technology, and reason gone awry. For in an age when it is some-
times considered “economically rational” to accept high insurance costs on plane
crashes rather than improve the safety of planes; when Ford Motor company decided
that it would be more cost-effective to incur the law suits (and loss of life) caused by
the placement of the gas tank on the Pintos rather than fix the problem, and only
changed its mind when an equally expedient solution was found; when personnel are
now referred to as Human Resources, like shale or oil, with the metaphorical implica-
tions that they (we) can be used up and disposed of or replaced when need be; when
launch dates are more important than the safety of astronauts and production quotas
more important than the safety of workers and residents alike; when expediency out-
weighs compassion in government and cost/benefit analyses are applied to human
welfare and technical considerations outweigh human considerations in almost every
fieldof endeavor, even in the social sciences and humanities—when every field
strives to be scientific and technical and decisions are made and consequences
weighed and value argued on the ethic of expediency only—the holocaust may have
200   Chapter 4 # Professional Writing as Ethical Action


          something to teach those of us in technical éommunication,                composition,   and
          rhetoric.

           Works Cited
               Arendt, Hannah, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York:
                   Viking, 1963.
               Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Trans. W. D. Ross. Introduction to Aristotle. Ed. Richard
                   McKeon. New York: Modern Library, 1947.
               —. The Politics. Ed. S. Everson. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1988.
               —. The Rhetoric. Trans. W. Rhys Roberts and I. Bywater. The Rhetoric and Poetics of
                   Aristotle. New York: Modern Library, 1954.
               Burke, Kenneth. “The Rhetoric of Hitler’s ‘Battle’.” The Philosophy of Literary Form:
                   Studies in Symbolic Action. 3rd ed. Berkeley: U of California P, 1973. 191-220.
               Cicero. De Oratore. Trans E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA:
                   Harvard UP, 1942. 2 vols.
               Dobrin, D. N. “Is Technical Writing Particularly Objective?” College English 47
                   (1985): 237-51.
               Ellul, Jacques. The Technological Society. Trans. John Wilkinson. New York: Knopf,
                   1964.
               Garver, Eugene. Machiavelli and the History of Prudence. Madison: U of Wisconsin P,
                    1987.
               Gauss, Christian.    Introduction.   The Prince. By Niccolo Machiavelli.    Trans. Luigi
                    Ricci. New York: New American Library, 1952. 7-30.
               Gibson, Walker. Tough, Sweet and Stuffy: An Essay on Modern American Prose Styles.
                  Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1966.
               Grimaldi, William M. A. Studies in the Philosophy of Aristotle’s Rhetoric. Weisbaden,
                  Germany: Franz Steiner Verlag GMBH, 1972.
               Habermas, Jurgen. “Technology and Science as ‘Ideology’.” Trans. Jeremy Shapiro.
                    Toward a Rational Society: Student Protest, Science, and Politics. Boston: Beacon P,
                    1970. 81-127.
               Heidegger, Martin. “The (Question Concerning Technology.” The Question
                  Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Trans. William Lovitt. New York: Harper,
                   1977. 3~35.
               —.   “The Turning.” The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Trans.
                   William Lovitt. New York: Harper, 1977. 36-49.
               Hitler, Adolph. Mein Kampf. New York: Reynal, 1941; Houghton, 1939.
               Johnson, Nan. “Ethos and the Aims of Rhetoric.” Essays on Classical Rhetoric and
                   Modern Discourse. Ed. Robert Connors, Lisa S. Ede, and Andrea Lunsford.
                   Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1984. 98-114.
               Kallendorf, Craig and Carol Kallendorf. “Aristotle and the Ethics of Business
                  Communication.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 3 (1989):
                  54-69.
               Lanzmann, Claude. Shoah: An Oral History of the Holocaust. New York: Pantheon,
                  1985.
               Lloyd, G. E. R. Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of His Thought. Cambridge:
                  Cambridge UP, 1968.
        Katz     = The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the Holocaust            201


   MacIntyre, Alasdair. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. 2nd ed. Notre Dame, IN:
      U of Notre Dame P, 1984.
   Mathes, J. C., and D. W. Stevenson. Designing Technical Reports: Writing for Audiences
       in Organizations. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1976.
   Miller, Carolyn R. “A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing.” College English
       40 (1979): 610-17.
   —. “The Polis as Rhetorical Community.” Paper presented at the International
       Society for the History of Rhetoric. Gottingen, West Germany, 1989.
   —. “The Rhetoric of Decision Science, or Herbert A. Simons Says.” The Rhetorical
       Turn: Invention and Persuasion in the Conduct of Inquiry. Ed. Herbert W. Simons. U
       of Chicago P, 1990. 162-84.
   —. “Technology as a Form Consciousness: A Study of Contemporary Ethos.” Central
       States Speech Journal 29 (1978): 228-36.
   Olsen, Leslie A., and Thomas N. Huckin. Principles of Communication for Science and
       Technology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983, (Rpt. as Technical Writing and
       Professional Communication. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991.)
   Popper, Karl R. The Open Society and Its Enemies. Vol. 2. New York: Harper 1962. 2
       vols.
   Proctor, Robert. Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       UP, 1988.
   Rowland, Robert C., and Deanna F Womack. “Aristotle’s View of Ethical Rhetoric.”
       Rhetoric Society Quarterly 15 (1985): 13-31.
   Shirer, William L. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany.
      Greenwich, CT: Fawcett, 1959.
   Speer, Albert. Inside the Third Reich. Trans. Richard Winston and Clara Winston.
       New York: Avon, 1971; Macmillan, 1970.
   Stein, George H., ed. Hitler. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1968.
   Steiner, George. In Bluebeard’s Castle: Some Notes Towards the Redefinition of Culture.
      New Haven, CT: Yale UP, 1971.
   Sullivan,   Dale   L. “Political-Ethical     Implications  of Defining       Technical
       Communication       as a Practice.”    Journal   of Advanced    Composition    10 (1990):
       375-86.
   Wiesel, Elie. “Art and the Holocaust: Trivializing Memory.” New York Times 11 June
       1989, sec. 2: 1+.
   Winner, Langdon. Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-Control as a Theme                       in
      Political Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT P, 1977.
   —. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus 109 (1980): 121-36.



DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 1. Define what Katz means by an ethic of expediency.
 2. Based on Katz's argument, explain the relationship between rhetoric and ethics, or more
   specifically the relationship between deliberative rhetoric and an ethic of expediency.
 3, Katz argues that “it is the ethic of expediency that enables deliberative rhetoric." Identify
    what one or two alternatives to an ethic of expediency might be. For each, explain the
    types of rhetoric they would enable.
202   Chapter 4 =      Professional Writing as Ethical Action


             4. In several instances, Katz states clearly what he is-and is not.trying to argue. Locate and
                list these instances, and use them to develop an abstracted view of his argument. Then,
                forecast what value his argument might have for professional writers.
             5. Develop two or three alternative scenarios describing what Just, the Nazi memo writer,
                  might have done instead of writing the memo he wrote. Identify the ethical choices he
                  would have had to make, the constraints under which he would have had to make them,
                  and the probable consequences of his alternative actions.


           PRORTOELEKEL
                HSE SEOSVEHUH OSH               BATEOSE            «   SSTPRGISEOSSOARSEHFSORESSSRFHOTSERS
                                                                                             ORES REETEEHELEEEE:


                 FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND )                           CONCEPTS
                 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
                 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
                 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
                 in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
                 the field itself.
                 1. phronesis
                 2. deliberation
                 3. heuristic
                 4. rhetoric/writing

           PESSLERBSSHHFHHOHEHRTAYVTRERELYGHEE
                                             BEE                        .    SRSRHPOHSSHHSTSRSSHEROERAHO
                                                                                              THES EDSHHEREEBERES



                 FRAMING PosTMODERN CoMMITMENT AND
            SOLIDARITY
           rao         @                                  SUPERS   ESCSHEHOROESEE   EHH   OHH   RHHEHHESEHRSE   TREMP ER   ORSHBEHRDEEEHES


                 JAMES E. PORTER >
                     I am arguing for politics and epistemologies of location, positioning, and situ-
                     ating, where partiality and not universality is the condition of being heard to
                     make rational knowledge claims.
                                                                           —Haraway, 1991, p. 195

          The position I am developing is a postmodern pragmatic one that involves a lot of
          deliberation and balancing of competing perspectives. You might consider it a kind of
          neo-Aristotelian brand of postmodernism because of its revival of phronesis as an im-
          portant faculty of the art of rhetoric—and yet it is also very much sophistic. I am less
          interested, however, in naming it than | am in describing its operation.
               This rhetorical ethics begins by seeing values and language use as inextricably
          bound. It sees writing as an act fraught with ethical issues. The stance I am advocat-
          ing is respectful of law, but does not see law as a determining or ultimate authority. It
          puts a high value on community customs, conventions, and beliefs (nomoi), but rec-
          ognizes that communities can be wrong, hegemonic, or oppressive. It puts a high
          value on the right of individual free expression and the importance of protecting that
          right, but also notes that individuals can wreck havoc on communities, and that,

          Source: Rhetorical Ethics and Internetworked Writing, James E. Porter, “Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity,”
          1998, pp. 149-166. Copyright © 1998 by Ablex, a division of Greenwood Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission
          of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc., Westport, CT.
                                   Porter   # Framing Postmodern    Commitment and Solidarity   203


ultimately, the individual is not a very solid or trustworthy ground for moral author-
ity. It places a high value on the spirit of caring, of brotherly and sisterly love, of
friendship—of a number of related principles that have status in numerous religious
and cultural traditions, which we might sum up with the phrase “love and respect for
others” (although that notion admits to a wide range of interpretations). It assigns a
preferential option for the poor, oppressed, and marginalized, saying in effect that any
ethical system based mainly on the principle of operative equality will fail to account
for systemic inequities and, thus, will risk perpetuating those inequities. It places a
high value on involvement and collaboration with others (and with The Other) and
on developing moral positions within a collaborative and cooperative framework of
dialogue. It places a high value on deliberation (a key principle in Aristotle’s [1976]
Nicomachean Ethics), the importance of carefully considering each situation in an
antilogical manner before pushing ahead. It places a high value on action:
Deliberation is necessary, but to overindulge in it is to defer action and, ultimately, to
freeze oneself into inaction. It stresses the operation of phronesis, the quality of being
able to determine what one should do, how one should act, and what one should be
even when the circumstances are murky, the issues complex, and the right action
hard to determine. It places a high value on the constraints of the particular case.
      A list of counterprinciples is not very satisfying, | realize, because such an ap-
proach does not generate clear and concrete answers to pressing problems. What it
does is suggest a process by which problems might be addressed. It does suggest some
key principles one should bring to bear on rhetorical/ethical problems, as suggested
earlier. It does not, however, tell us which principle ought to control a decision in any
given case or how to reconcile opposing principles. It does suggest criteria for judging
the process—and in that sense is Habermasian.
     The whole point of my position is that we should not attempt to develop a moral
geometry—a scientific, rigorous, rules-based approach to settling ethical decisions. In
this respect, my rhetorical ethics differs sharply from the approach of Kantian-type
ethical theories (like Rawls’, 1971). My approach is closer to Aristotle’s in its insis-
tence on the necessity of developing “the art of moral judgment” (Benhabib, 1992, p.
53). This art of moral judgment requires a strong sense of values and priorities and
principles, but does not leverage those values and priorities in top-down, tules-
oriented procedure. It places a high value on reflection, deliberation, and “theorizing,”
but does not place much value in Theory, as the abstract formulation of determining
rules and principles. Rather, it places values and priorities into a heuristic tension (a)
with competing values and priorities, and (b) with the concrete particulars of ethical
and rhetorical situations involving real people and particular technologies.
    My approach is also an effort to develop a procedural heuristic that will assist the
rhetorical ethical process, that is, that will help writers and writing teachers in the
act(s) of producing discourse. Too often ethical systems of the philosophical sort fall
into a backward-looking hermeneutic rut: they focus too much on post facto moral
justification (or critique) of past action and do not provide us with much help figur-
ing out what to do now as we write today. When one writes, one decides. Writing is
an action involving an ethical choice about what one is to be and what one is to do.
At the point when you begin to write, you begin to define yourself ethically. You
make a choice about what is the right thing to do—even if that choice is a tentative
and contingent one.
204   Chapter 4 ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



               As I argued earlier (in Chapters 2 and 3), adopting this point of view requires
          seeing rhetoric as both productive and practical art, not merely as one or the other. It
          requires seeing rhetoric and ethics as distinct yet also overlapping arts. Writing is not
          only a making (poesis), but it is also a doing (praxis). Writing is an action with ethical
          and political consequences. Writing is a praxis that is both an act and a relationship
          (Dussel, 1988), that is, it does something to someone, one part of which is establish-
          ing power relations (e.g., between writers and readers, among various audiences).
               Paulo Freire (1970/1993) echoes this important point as well in his description of
          the two dimensions of the word: reflection and action. He argues that:
               When a word is deprived of its dimension of action, reflection automatically suffers as
               well; and the word is changed into idle chatter, into verbalism, into an alienated and
               alienating “blah.” It becomes an empty word, one which cannot denounce the world, for
               denunciation is impossible without a commitment to transform, and there is no transfor-
               mation without action. (p. 68, emphasis in original)

               The view of language and writing as poesis only (“verbalism”) renders language
          into impotent, “idle chatter.” Viewing language and writing as also action allows for
          commitment and transformation. The praxis that my rhetorical ethics promotes is
          the coordinated and dialogic view that Freire espouses: viewing the full capacity of
          language/writing as both reflection and action in dialogic tension, as both a making
          and a doing.
               So what does all this mean on an operational level? ] mention now several proce-
          dural principles that I see deriving from this approach. Despite the many deep and
          murky ethical problems we seem to face on electronic networks, we can cull some
          principles and advance some arguments for a critical rhetorical ethics for internet-
          worked writing, that is, we can make some positive statements about how one ought
          to act as a writer (and secondarily as a reader). I divide these principles into two cate-
          gories: writer posture toward audience and procedural strategies.
               The question of whether these principles do, or should, have any legal force is a
          legal question that I do not address here—although, of course, several of the discus-
          sions here have become intertwined with legal issues. The ethical cannot ignore the
          legal, nor the legal the ethical.


          THE WRITER’S RELATIONSHIP FOOTING VIS-A-VIS
          AUDIENCES/READERS
          Respect Audience/Respect Differences
           If there is a single main principle of postmodern ethics, it is probably this—acknowl-
           edge differences. Postmodernism’s primary critique of modernism is that in its move
           to rationality, impartiality, and objectivity, modernism obscures difference, and differ-
           ence as an operating principle is seen by many postmodernists as fundamental. Show
           respect for—care for—others. Respect their differences. Heed the values of your audi-
           ence, both the values of the community/culture at large and the differences among
           individual audience members.
                What do we mean by “audience”? The postmodern injunction to show respect
           for difference extends beyond audience in the limited sense (that is, those whom one
                                   Porter   = Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity    205


directly addresses in a discourse) to pertain to all those who are represented in or af-
fected by such discourse as well. Audience in this broader sense refers to an entire
community, not simply to a physical flesh-and-blood assemblage, not simply to the
evident or immediate readers or listeners of a discourse (see Porter, 1992a). When we
start thinking about the vastness and diversity of the potential audience(s) involved
in the Internet and World Wide Web, then we can see that internetworked writing
poses a challenge for conventional (and more constrained) print notions of audience.
     A postmodern rhetorical ethics says that differences among audiences must not
be obliterated. Distinct identities must be recognized. In a moral discourse readers
should not be treated as an homogenous whole or as if they were all members of a
universal collective. Difference must be respected, but we should move beyond
merely “respect” for difference, which could be seen to promote a kind of distant,
begrudging tolerance. Luce Irigaray (1984/1993) suggest that we should move ac-
tively to embrace difference and to celebrate it, and that we should certainly be in
awe of the mystery of difference. When I was first joining academic LISTSERV groups
in the late 1980s, I remember how such groups had to adjust to the presence of
“outsiders,” that is, people from other fields and disciplines would frequently partic-
ipate in such groups and would occasionally invite the ire of the “insiders” by doing
so. The insiders in the field would sometimes wave the flag of disciplinary expertise
as a way to stifle the contribution of those contributing other viewpoints or work-
ing out of alternate disciplinary paradigms. (For example, sometimes lawyers on the
CNI-COPYRIGHT group would express impatience with the nonlawyers. One speech
communication theorist on the IPCT list, Interpersonal Computing Technology,
would trot out his academic credentials whenever the discussion was threatened by
a nonacademic viewpoint.) What I have noticed more recently, at least in the aca-
demic electronic groups I belong to, is that there is greater tolerance for discipli-
nary difference and often even an appreciation for multidisciplinary difference. |
cannot say, however, that such a respect for difference extends much beyond acade-
mic notions of multidisciplinarity.
     The importance of differences among audiences is a key, although seldom dis-
cussed, principle in Aristotle’s Rhetoric. Yes, Aristotle’s conception of audience is ex-
clusively male, but what Aristotle builds into his art is the essential fact of difference:
Considering differences between audience types (e.g., age, gifts of fortune, emotional
disposition) is a crucial part of the art (Book 2). Unless the rhetor knows quite specif-
ically the various characters and positions of his audience, he cannot begin to under-
stand how to talk to them. Furthermore, Aristotle posits that rhetorical argument be-
gins with audience belief, the basis for enthymemic        reasoning. So in this sense,
respect for audience standpoint is integral to Aristotle’s conception of the art.
     Irigaray (1984/1993) provides a direct critique of Aristotle’s sexual monism. In
her deconstruction of Aristotle’s Physics (in An Ethics of Sexual Difference), she argues
for physical sexual difference as the foundational ground for ethics. Both Irigaray
(1984/1993) and Iris Marion Young (1990) point to difference as a foundational prin-
ciple. For Irigaray, sexual difference is the foundation of a relational ethics. For
Young, acceptance of the validity of differences among social groups must be the basis
for political justice. Irigaray and Young both point to how traditional philosophy—or
what Young calls “normative social philosophy and political theory” (p. 149)—has
worked to obscure difference. The result of such an obfuscation is domination by a
206   Chapter 4 = Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          privileged group that hides its “groupness” (e.g., whiteness, masculinity) under the
          coordinated claims of objectivity, impartiality, neutrality, and universality. The first
          step, then, in achieving political or ethical justice is the process of acknowledging
          differences, including exposing the hidden or obscured differences that often end up
          dominating. The critical turn that Young makes is to view differences not as undesir-
           able, or alien, or the Other (p. 170), not as the subordinate second term of a decon-
           structed binary, but as a value in its own right—that is, as “specificity, variation, het-
           erogeneity” (p. 171). The turn Irigaray makes is a theological one: Embracing and
           celebrating difference brings us to a transcendent spirituality.
                Charles Scott (1990) reminds us of the importance of being “alert to exclusions
           and to forgotten aspects in a people’s history” (p. 7). Our uses of discourse must work
           to insure that the values we invoke do not drown out alternative voices. Thus, a crit-
           ical rhetorical ethic does more than merely “respect” audience in a passive or de-
           tached way. It works to liberate the Other by naming and making space for that
           which is taken for granted or “routinely excluded and silenced” (p. 8).

           Care for Audience/Care for Concrete Other
           (Versus Generalized Other)
           In Book 2 of Rhetoric, Aristotle introduces several characteristics of speakers/writers
           as ethical principles. These are especially powerful principles, as Aristotle articulates
           them, because they combine ethos and pathos: They are feelings as well as elements of
           character. Aristotle emphasizes the importance of expressing kindliness, of having
           good feeling toward others (karis) (see Grimaldi, 1988, pp. 127-128). Also important
           is entering discursive relations in a spirit of friendship and mutual caring (philos) as
           well as a generosity of spirit (caritas). Cicero (1942) pushes “respect” for audience
           even further, into the realm of emotional and psychological commitment, into what
           we might consider the realm of caring for audience (De Oratore, 2.44.189). We see
           the principle of “commitment to other” as a principle in Greek culture as well as clas-
           sical rhetoric. The “guest friend” relationship is an important ethic, perhaps the most
           important, in Greek tragedy: The principle says that as host or hostess you have a sa-
           cred duty to protect and care for the Other, the visiting alien. In Greek tragedy, vio-
           lating this ethic leads to war, death, destruction, and chaos. (Usually only the inter-
           vention of the gods, deus ex machina, can restore order.) If we think about such a
           principle as applied to the management of LISTSERV groups, we can see that it would
           call the listowner to take on some responsibility, as host or hostess, for those “guests”
           participating in any particular electronic community.
                The caring ethic, as we saw in Chapter 4, gets its most thorough treatment in the
           feminist ethical articulations of Nel Noddings (1984) and Carol Gilligan (1993),
           who view the ethical stance of the “caring one” as a distinctly feminist position that
           has been historically subordinated to the masculine deontological and abstract ethic
           of rights. Rather than viewing abstractness and impartiality as the revered character-
           istics of the ethical stance, the caring ethic views personal and emotional concern for
           the distinct person as a superior ethical posture.
               In her critique of the abstract impartiality of Habermas’s        discourse ethic,
           Benhabib (1992) stresses this point in particular. One must avoid “generalizing the
           other,” but must engage the concrete and particular features of one’s audience, who is
                                      Porter   = Framing Postmodern       Commitment and Solidarity   207


actually “there,” as far as that can be determined (although that becomes particularly
difficult in electronic discourse): “The standpoint of the concrete other . . . requires
us to view each and every rational being as an individual with a concrete history,
identity and affective-emotional constitution” (p. 159). Stereotyping of audience dif-
ferences—for example, referring to “women” as a political or social collective—is
what Benhabib means by treating the other as a generalized type (see hooks, 1990;
Rorty, 1991). Benhabib critiques Habermas's discourse ethic for not stressing the im-
portance of “the concrete moral self” (p. 146). Similarly, Feenberg (1991) sees the
kind of formal abstraction represented by Habermas’s ethic as too remote, both from
specific material technological settings as well as from the experiences and identities
of real people.
     We see a theological take on this principle expressed in liberation theology. The
ultimate sin, according to liberation theologian Enrique Dussel (1988), is instrumen-
talizing people as things: “Sin is domination over the other” (p. 61); it is failing to
take into account distinct personness (needs, identity, character, gender, background,
experience). From this perspective, formal abstraction does not simply result in bad
theory or bad rhetoric, it is unjust and sinful.

Do Not Oppress/Do No Harm

The negative corollary of the principles “respect audience difference” and “care for
audience” is do not oppress them or dominate them. Do them no harm. But what ex-
actly does this common ethical principle mean in terms of discourse?
     Invoking Habermas’s discourse ethic, Benhabib (1992) identifies two key princi-
ples of communicative ethics that provide some criteria for determining whether a
discursive setting is indeed “doing harm”—the principles of universal moral respect,
and the principle of egalitarian reciprocity:
    The “universal and necessary communicative presuppositions of argumentative speech”
    entail strong ethical assumptions. They require of us: (1) that we recognize the right of all
    beings capable of speech and action to be participants in the moral conversation—I will
    call this the principle of universal moral respect; (2) these conditions further stipulate that
    within such conversations each has the same symmetrical rights to various speech acts, to
    initiate new topics, to ask for reflection about the presuppositions of the conversation,
    etc. Let me call this the principle of egalitarian reciprocity. The very presuppositions of the
    argumentation situation then have a normative content that precedes the moral argu-
    ment itself. (p. 29, ital in original)

    These principles extend from Habermas’s (1990) distinction between strategic
action and communicative         action. Strategic action is manipulative persuasion or
public speech acts that attempt to coerce or manipulate audiences. Communicative
action is Habermas’ ideal ethical discourse action, the criteria for which are expressed
in the two principles stated earlier. In ethical communicative action, the audience is
treated not as a passive decoder or receiver, but as an equal interlocutor with recipro-
cal rights. In this sense, Habermas sets up a discourse ethic that reaffirms the old ra-
tionalistic privileging of dialectic (and argument) over rhetoric (and persuasion).
The limitations of this ethic are: (a) it does not provide us with pragmatic criteria, as
almost no real public discourse are capable of meeting these criteria; and (b) it is not
208   Chapter 4 =   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          sensitive enough to the inequities of discursive arrangements or to the presence of
          power and oppression in discursive settings. (In her revision of the Habermasian dis-
          course ethic, Benhabib recognizes these limitations and works to address them.)
               For alternate criteria, we can look to postmodern political commentary that be-
          gins with the consideration of power and oppression. Foucault (1987) makes a crucial
          distinction between “relationships of power” and “states of domination.” Although
          all acts of writing or rhetoric might be said to be acts of power, they are not all acts of
          domination. Power is more general. Foucault says that relationships of power “have
          an extremely wide extension of human relations. There is a whole network of rela-
          tionships of power, which can operate between individuals, in the bosom of the fam-
          ily, in an educational relationship, in the political body, etc.” (p. 3). Domination, on
          the contrary, refers to invariable relations of power, that is, to “firmly set and con-
          gealed” settings that “block a field of relations of power” and “render them impassive
          and invariable” by preventing “all reversibility of movement” (p. 3). Both individuals
          and social groups can dominate.
               This distinction is important for an ethics of rhetoric as it provides a criterion for
          critiquing rhetorical acts. When we write electronically (or otherwise), we are engag-
          ing in an act of power, according to Foucault’s notion of power: Our effort to inform,
          persuade, or entertain is an effort to establish an authority vis-a-vis some reader(s).
          Rather than wring our hands in dismay over the arrogance of wielding this power
          (what I think of as a spasm of postmodern liberal guilt), we should see the exercise of
          discursive power as common, frequent, unavoidable, and not necessarily unethical.
          The distinction that is important pertains to acts of domination and oppression. For
          Foucault, domination refers to those acts of visible or invisible power that block “re-
          versibility of movement,” that is, they prevent a group or individual from expressing
          alternatives or exercising alternate choices. Although we cannot avoid the obligation
          of power when we write, we can try to avoid writing that dominates or oppresses.
               Young (1990) further distinguishes between domination and oppression, viewing
          both as institutional forms. Domination refers to “institutional conditions which in-
          hibit or prevent people from participating in determining their actions or the condi-
          tions of their actions” (p. 38). All of us are subject to various forms of domination,
          but that does not mean that domination affects us all in the same way: “[NJot every-
          one subject to domination is also oppressed” (p. 38). Domination, in fact, may work
          to the advantage of some social groups. A social group is oppressed, however, when
           the domination works to systematically inhibit people’s abilities, freedoms, choices
           (p. 38). Thus, domination means that people are excluded from participating in the
           systems and institutions that guide or determine their actions. Oppression means
           that, because of this exclusion, a people’s freedoms are inhibited. This distinction is
           important for an ethics of rhetoric as it provides a criterion for distinguishing com-
           peting social groups’ claims to being “oppressed.” (See Sullivan & Porter, 1997,
           Chap. 5, for further discussion of the implications of oppression.)
                Does your act of rhetoric allow for what Foucault calls “reversibility of move-
           ment” and Benhabib (1992) refers to as “reversibility of perspectives” (p. 146)? If you
           are a LISTSERV manager, for instance, are you autocratic in terms of how you exercise
           your authority on the list? (The liberal individual theory of property supports such
           autocracy, preferring to focus on the question of who “owns” the list rather than as-
           signing at least some communal ethical authority to participants.) Or do the mem-
                                    Porter   = Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity   209


bers of the list have some say in determining the status of their condition? Does the
list operate by a “love it or leave it” philosophy, which says in effect that if you do not
want to abide by the owner’s rules, then your only choice is to leave the list? This is
an act of domination and exclusion, and the presumed “choice” to leave a list is a
forced choice and maybe a’professionally harmful one for an academic whose area of
specialization is represented on the list.
     Again, the issue should not be reduced to this kind of either-or false dilemma: If
the listowner does not establish authority (i-e., create and enforce strict rules), then
the list participants will endlessly debate what the rules should be, and chaos will re-
sult. Certainly, with the way LISTSERV operations work, the listowner has every right
to set up a list as he or she sees fit. The listowner has power, but with that power
comes the obligation and responsibility to list participants. The problem, of course,
for listowners or for writing teachers who sponsor electronic conferences is addressing
the dilemmas that can arise (as we saw in Chapter 5) between competing interest
groups or between individuals and the majority.


THE WRITER'S           PROCEDURAL            STRATEGIES
Consult Dialogically with a Diversity of Sources
The law should always be considered very seriously in decisions about the status of in-
tellectual property, but the law cannot be relied on, in every instance, to provide
clearcut advice or protection. The law is a complex and diverse set of decisions,
statutes, opinions, and judgments that intersect with a wide range of human prac-
tices. The ethical writer has to consider a plurality of choices, including diverse and
often conflicting laws, policies, and theories. The principle of ethical pluralism does
not say that “everybody is right,” but it does say that there are competing ethical
standards that may have application and validity in a given situation. How do you
choose among them? First, you do not do it alone. In rhetorical ethics, decision mak-
ing is social, collaborative, and dialogic. Numerous theorists have recognized open-
ness to dialogue (Haynes-Burton, 1990) and “tolerance for differences” (Lang, 1991,
p. 5) as important qualities of ethical writing. Rorty says that responding to ethical
dilemmas often involves “interweaving” opposing principles.
     This process resembles what Jonsen and Toulmin (1988) describe as the key op-
erating procedures of phronesis in Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (1976). The ethical
person/writer must apply circumspectio (“looking around”) in order to determine op-
tions and choices. He or she must be careful to judge circumstantiae (“what is standing
around”), that is, the current conditions. He or she must apply cautio (carefulness) in
making any decision, because human action is multiforma (takes many forms) (pp.
130-131). In short, ethical writing requires some careful deliberation, some mar-
shalling of options and alternatives, some care in determining the conditions of one’s
rhetorical setting, and some respect for the variances of human action: We might re-
gard such principles as the basics of an ethical approach to rhetorical invention.
     You start this process by collecting a range of authoritative principles from a
range of sites. Rhetorical ethics does not assign a priori authority to any site or source,
but rather places competing sources of authority in dialectical tension. The list of re-
sources in the Appendix includes a number of online discussion group that consider
210   Chapter 4 # Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          ethical and legal issues in electronic networking. Writers and:writing teachers can use
          this list both to collect sources of authority and as a forum for ethical dialectic. They
          can look for ethical guidance to acceptable use policies established by government,
          education, and private network lists. Information about the examples of various ac-
          ceptable use policies (as well as records of relevant legal decisions) are stored in an
          electronic database maintained by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. In short,
          these network sites serve as a concrete basis for dialogic exploration of rhetorical/eth-
          ical issues.
               If | have a question about the ethics of the use of electronic text, for instance, an
           electronic copyright question, I know that there are several sites of authority | can
           consult. For legal authority and for publishers’ and librarians’ perspectives, | would
           consult the CNI-COPYRIGHT electronic list. For a discussion of these issues from the
           point of view of writing teachers, however, I would consult participants on ACW-L,
           the list for the Alliance of Computers and Writing. Different lists provide different
           disciplinary viewpoints and different forms of expertise. For truly problematic cases, |
           might consult several lists by posting my dilemma in the form of a question to each
           list. Thus, the electronic network provides the technological mechanism for heuristic
           invention of rhetorical/ethical issues.
                Reading is obviously important. Read suspiciously, read critically, but nonethe-
           less read. Consult a variety of sources for guidance when necessary, especially elec-
           tronic sources. Cyberwriters can learn more about copyright law, for instance, by
           consulting print sources on intellectual property law in general and on how it ap-
           plies to cyberspace in particular (e.g., Branscomb, 1994; Ermann, Williams, &
           Gutierrez, 1990; Forester & Morrison, 1994; Miller & Blumenthal, 1986; Oz, 1994;
           Woodmansee & Jaszi, 1995). Cyberwriters should consult electronic publishing
           guides that develop policy for use of electronic text (e.g., American Library
           Association, 1971; Association for Computing Machinery, 1995; Bill of rights, 1993;
           Corporation for Research and Educational Networking, 1993; Duggan, 1991; Kadie,
           1991; Kahin, 1992; National Science Foundation, 1992; Oakley, 1991). The work of
           Paula Samuelson (who writes a regular column for the Communications of the ACM)
           addresses the issues of intellectual property in the digital age—in fact, Samuelson
           (1996) is one of the leading authorities on electronic copyright. The network itself
           is a useful source for collecting up-to-date information. The internetworked writer
           can browse some of the intellectual property Web sites listed in the Appendix and
           participate in LISTSERV discussion groups that focus on copyright and other
           legal/ethical issues.
                Figure 4.1, the shot chart of ethical positions, can also serve as a rhetorical/ethi-
           cal heuristic for writers. The diagram problematizes ethical positions. If anyone is in-
           clined to rely on simplistic ethical pronouncements, that diagram serves to identify a
           range of competing ethical frameworks that can serve to critique and problematize
           such pronouncements.


           Situate and Contextualize at the Local and Particular Level

           A postmodern rhetorical ethics emphasizes the authority of contextualized elements
           and of the situated moment (kairos). It says the particular historical and situated mo-
           ment and the particular details and circumstances of that setting (the “facts,” values,
                                    Porter   = Framing Postmodern   Commitment   and Solidarity   211


audiences, timing, historical circumstances, technologies) are critical. In their neo-
casuistic rhetoric ethic, Jonsen and Toulmin (1988) stress the importance of authoriz-
ing the details of the case, as well as the particular situated circumstances in which
any ethical issue resides.
     The situated side of critical rhetorical ethics requires that we make judgments
sensitive to the constraints of local policy and practice, particular settings and cases,
and, in the case of electronic writing and publishing, to the particular technologies
and customs of use for those technologies. Feenberg (1991) in particular says that we
have to avoid “the decontextualizing practice of formal abstraction [which] transforms
its objects into mere means” (p. 170), by which he means, in part, the kind of ratio-
nalistic, philosophical approach to ethics and technology advocated by those in the
Western deontological tradition of philosophical ethics (including Habermas).
Contextualized awareness is sensitive to the constraints and norms of the particular
form of technology. In concurrence with Feenberg, Martha Cooper (1991) says that a
postmodern ethics must consider (a) “rhetorical situation” more broadly than in the
conventional sense to include the medium and the effect of the medium on power re-
lations (questions about access, for instance, and who controls and maintains the
medium), and (b) the institutional bureaucracies and professional settings in which
political advocacy and decision making occur.
     A position sensitive to a technological setting would notice, for instance, that
notions of netiquette on LISTSERV groups are different from that on MUDs or news-
groups. LISTSERV groups that have a designated “owner” tend to be more orderly and
academic in the way they carry on discussion. Participants know (or should know)
that their presence there depends on owner tolerance. In this respect the ethical
“law” of the LISTSERV group is fairly absolute and undemocratic: The owner rules.
(Even though enlightened owners can choose to share their power if they wish, the
choice is that of the owner). Newsgroups and MUDs are much more freewheeling fo-
rums that do not have owners in the same sense (although they may have initiators
and moderators).
     Notions of ownership for print publications are different than for electronic
archives. To questions about the ethics of reposting electronic messages, a rhetorical
ethic would inquire about the conventions of the specific community, about the na-
ture of the message, about the norms for reposting that may have relevance to the
case. In other words, such an ethic would grant authority to the specific situation, to
the specific technology, to the exact nature of the message, and to the norms and
conventions   (nomoi) of the electronic communities       involved. It is, however, also
aware of the danger of letting any single community isolate itself from principles out-
side that particular community—principles of universal human respect and reciproc-
ity, for instance, from discourse ethics.
     Figure 1, which served to identify the various agencies influencing the act of
electronic writing in the composition classroom, can also double as a visual heuristic
to identify the agencies involved in rhetorical/ethical writing situations. That is, the
diagram represents the matrix of forces that one might consider as operative in the
act of internetworked writing. The answer to the question of “what policies should
guide my writing in this electronic group?” lies not in one place but in several: There
are likely to be competing policies and guidelines to be negotiated and reconciled.
The visual serves as a prompt to writers to “look in several places” and alerts them to
212        Chapter 4 ® Professional Writing as Ethical Action



                                                   writing technology    :            ay
                                                   (design, interface)
                             campus computing                                Internet level (e.g., NREN,
                              (policy, practice)                                   policy, practice)



      cultural backgrounds                                                                         cultural backgrounds
             life experiences                                                                 life experiences
          home communities                                                                    home communities
  professional identities                                                                          professional identities



                          online communities                                 law & meta-ethics
                              (policy, practice)                              (policy, practice)

  Figure 1. Sites influencing internetworked writing.

                 the need to reconcile possibly competing sites of ethical authority. The heuristic is
                 general enough to function across a spectrum of electronic writing situations, yet its
                 terms focus the writer on concrete agents and sites. (This is the challenge facing the
                 designer of any heuristic: designing the heuristic for application across a relatively
                 wide range of writing situations, yet not making the terms so general and abstract as
                 to lose pragmatic and situated value in prompting writers.)

                 Acknowledge Ethical Complexities and Ambiguities
                 If I offer an “answer” in this book it is that problems (real problems, that is, not just
                 inconveniences, but real problems of incommensurability and ethical dilemmas) are
                 best worked out through the operation of a local and patient rhetorical pragmatism
                 that is deliberative and reflective and that pays some attention to the processes in-
                 volved, to the particulars of each case and its material conditions; and to the individ-
                 ual persons affected. | admit that at points we may have to resort to abstractions and
                 slogans—yes, by all means, Free Speech! and hurrah for Democracy!—but remember
                 how easy it is to misuse such slogans. Do not use them to shut off or polarize discus-
                 sion. Be aware of how resistant the really difficult cases are to simple solutions by ab-
                 straction.
                       As I say, this is not the answer that most want to hear. As Stanley Fish (1994)
                  says, “Complexity does not play well in Peoria or anywhere else” (p. 58), including
                 Washington, D.C. But then, that leaves something for educators to do, does it not?:
                 to acknowledge the complexity of public issues, to promote careful thinking and
                 deliberation, to promote fair consideration and representation of all sides, to resist
                 the “single story” approach that the newspapers and television media and, increas-
                 ingly, the electronic networks promote—and that both right- and left-wing dema-
                 gogues favor.
                      As soon as you make claims like the ones in the previous paragraph, you run into
                 trouble, of course, especially with postmodern ironists. The abstractions you casually
                 dismissed, then yourself used, double back to trip you up: Whose idea of “careful
                 thinking”? Which notion of “fair representation”? You can never completely evade
                                   Porter   * Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity    213


the abstractions (a.k.a. theorizing), but you can be wary of them and alert to their op-
eration. You can be an advocate of “free speech,” but be wary of those cases that push
the free speech principle to its limits and be capable of asking the critical questions
(“free” for whom? at whose expense’).
    Jonsen and Toulmin (1988) remind us that complexity is the nature of ethics. For
some difficult cases and situations there will never be clear and easy answers—and to
shout at each other as if there were, or could be, is the ultimate act of stupidity. For
tough cases there will always be moral ambiguity (this is the de facto nature of tough
cases). It is in the nature of human experience to be multiforma, complex to the de-
gree that in its distinct situatedness it will always manage to remain one step ahead of
our theorizing and our categories for talking about it. Rather than being dismayed by
this complexity, we might try to appreciate it.


MOVING TOWARD               SOLIDARITY
There is a point at which continual open-ended heuristic thinking is dangerously dis-
abling. Reflection, deliberation, careful interrogation, practiced skepticism—are all
valued postures in this critical rhetorical ethic. At some point, however, the ques-
tioning process has to stop to make a commitment, even if only a contingent one. (If
you deconstruct the idea of “computer classroom” to death, you just are not gonna
have a computer classroom to teach in.)
     If the position I am advocating tips in a direction, it tips in favor of solidarity—in
favor of the position that we have to use rhetoric, ultimately, to enable solidarity: a
solidarity that does not build itself on a rockbed of universal strictures, but that is a
symbolically constructed solidarity of opinions that we build for our common good
because we need a common good. This position tips in the favor of solidarity and the
communal, too, in part for an ironic reason: Because in U.S. society the liberal-indi-
vidualist position has for so long been dominant, | adopt the communal standpoint
because it provides the most direct counter to the dominant—and often, at times, op-
pressive—liberal-individual ethic.
     The great fear is that communal identification represents a return to a Western
logocentric masculine rhetoric. Critics worry about solidarity and community as op-
erating principles. They say we have been “identified” for too long and that it is time
to recognize diversity. Steve Katz (1992, 1993) and others warn us about the problem
of the common good becoming a totalitarian evil or a majority oppression. Yet my
worry is that we are circling back to a place we have already been. Are we teaching
writers to hurl their differences at one another, just like rhetoric used to teach its
practitioners how to hurl arguments at one another, without actually listening to one
another? (This is what appears to happen frequently in newsgroup arguments and on
the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives.) Are we returning to a debate model
assuming equal and opposite participants in a world where equality is not the com-
mon condition? Does the resistance to a community or solidarity model lead us to an-
other version of the old liberal model, perhaps a postmodern version of it? In such a
model—what we might call the rock-hurling, debate model of public discourse—the
more powerful are bound to win, because they can afford more and bigger rocks.
Young (1990) warns against the danger of interest group pluralism that in its stri-
214   Chapter 4 ®   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          dency can disable dialogue, and thus, block effective change. If interest groups do not
          work toward solidarity, then they will diffuse political potency and leave untouched
          and unchanged the systems and institutions that dominate us all.
                The community I have in mind is not a melting pot or blender. The solidarity of
          this community does not require the effacement of difference, but rather builds on
          difference in the manner suggested by both Irigaray (1984/1993) and Young (1990).
          This community requires both feminine and masculine modes of thinking. For
          Irigaray, we achieve transcendence, spiritual fulfillment, in the mutual embrace that
          is a celebration of our difference. This commonality achieves its strength through and
          celebrates diversity. For Young, diversity and variation in a society should be viewed
          as a source of strength (although I do not share her optimism in the city as the ideal
          model of communal diversity).
                There is a tendency in the field of rhetoric/composition, especially in cultural
          studies discussions, to mislabel community metaphors mainly in a negative way (e.g.,
          as hegemony, exclusivity, the dominant culture) and to set up a straw binary: diver-
          sity as hero, hegemony as villain—which is an unassailable position, like saying
          “good” and “bad,” and so is ultimately not very helpful.
                There is another set of terms one can invoke to stress the positive notions of
          community and solidarity: unity, identification, alliance. Rather than throwing our
          competing sets of god terms at one another, take an ironic viewpoint and, like
          Kenneth Burke, see these two sets of terms as operating in a kind of binary tension.
          Burke saw all rhetoric as always involving both Identification and Division: As we
          strive for likeness and similarity (consubstantiality) we also affirm our differences,
          and the two notions are in constant oscillating tension. Any act of writing involves
          an identification—a positioning of a “we” and an establishing of a set of values that
          are over here, with “us.” There is always an embracement: The writer engages an au-
          dience, identifies with an audience, and in that process      a community is formed or
          changed. In the best of worlds, we always hope the writer’s hug is an embrace, not a
          strangulation. We hope the embrace is mutual—dialogic if you like. However, you
          can not have rhetoric/writing without it, or without its counterpart-—division.
              Thus, the exercise of rhetoric is always at its core ironic, and the trick from the
          point of view of rhetorical ethics is to not let the irony freeze us into inaction, but to
          try to negotiate a nonoppressive committed standpoint in the midst of this irony.
               At this point, my position may sound like Richard Rorty’s (1989) description of
          “liberal irony” in Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Rorty assumes an ironic stance
          through most of the book, yet argues at the same time for liberalism as a utopian
          ideal. He explicitly situates himself between Foucault (“the ironist unwilling to be a
           liberal”) and Habermas (“the liberal who is unwilling to be an ironist”; p. 61).
               The stance Rorty advocates is that the “committed ironist,” who looks at all sides
          of an issues but then takes a stand. The stand may have doubts; it may be contingent,
          but for the time being it is a strong stand. Like me, Rorty is suspicious of the use of
          common-sense terms (e.g., democracy and liberalism) to address problems: Too often
          they are instruments used to end dialogue by shutting off the Other. Like me, Rorty
          does not see much promise in extreme postmodern ludicism as a way to address social
          problems. This will lead to too much self-doubt and lack of action and character on
           the part of the community.
                                      Porter ® Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity          215


     Unlike me, Rorty views irony as something private, to be carried out among ex-
pert philosophers and literary critics of irony, who effect change in small increments
within disciplinary groups (e.g., Nabokov). This is where I have trouble with Rorty’s
conception of the “committed ironist” or “liberal ironist.” Such a position ends up re-
instatiating the academic male philosophical liberal humanist, the elite intellectual
who publicly advocates what he privately and ironically despises. This posture is, ulti-
mately, one of despair that public discourse can ever be anything other than stupid
and rhetorically useless. Rorty’s position ends up despairing of any productive role for
mass education in public life. The best that education can aspire to, in Rorty’s model,
is to train a few elite and aesthetically sensitive ironists, who will celebrate their crit-
ical acumen in isolated academic enclaves—the ethical ivory tower.
      My position on irony owes more to Burke and especially to Lyotard and
Thébaud’s    (1985) discussion of rhetorical ethics in Just Gaming.             It views certain
paired opposites as having a rhetorical/ethical value in helping us construct writing
stances.   (Such pairs include individual/eommunity,           cooperation/competition,       cri-
tique/construct, and static/dynamic.) Rorty falls victim to the philosophical tempta-
tions of ironic formal abstraction: He never contextualizes his discussion. However,
the Lyotardian position, although ironic and theoretical, is a casuistic one that advo-
cates a pragmatic case-by-case basis. It is ironic because it is constantly questioning
the commonsensical, overturning the expected, saying “no” when everybody else says
“ves.” However, it does manage to locate commitment at a situated case level.
Lyotard accepts, finally, the inevitability of phronesis, a concession that Rorty is not
willing to make.
     My cautious endorsement of solidarity also contrasts with Victor Vitanza’s
(1991a) rejection of Aristotelian. pragmatics, which he views as a system advocating a
strong view of consensus. Although I agree with Vitanza’s critique of strong consen-
sus, | cannot ultimately endorse his construction of ethics as “drifting.” To me the
ethics that Vitanza ultimately affirms embodies two constructs. One construct is the
free-floating individual system resister, which is simply an angrier, more radical ver-
sion of liberal individualism. The other construct is itself a system: Although Vitanza
says he wants to resist all systems, he also clearly wants “to drift toward some notions
of a Third Sophistic” (p. 121; see also Vitanza, 1991b, 1994).
     The chief components of this situated ironic communalism are pursuit of the
common good; respect for individual and community, for diversity and unity; and
constant questioning and revision. | see the community versus individual, consensus
versus dissensus, controversy as a false binary. Why not hold both together? In The
Politics (1962), Aristotle makes an important point about unity versus diversity:
    Certainly there must be some unity in a state, as in a household, but not an absolutely to-
    tal unity. There comes a point where the state, if it does not cease to be a state altogether,
    will certainly come close to that and be a worse one; it is as if one were to reduce concord
    to unison or rhythm to a single beat. As we have said before, a state is a plurality, which
    must depend on education to bring about its common unity. (2.5 1263b29)

     Aristotle says, in effect, that in developing unity we must not obliterate differ-
ence, we must not “reduce concord to unison or rhythm to a single beat.” Other
                                                  .                         D            ”




unity metaphors are more problematic, insofar as they do not so readily grant diver-
216   Chapter 4 =   Professional Writing as Ethical Action



          sity its due. For instance, in 1 Corinthians 12, Paul talks about the relation of parts
          to whole and gives us the metaphor of the faithful as one unified body: “There are
          many parts, yet one body.” Postmodern ethics has expressed strong reservations
          about this kind of single body image (as numerous feminists have said, whenever
          there is just one body it is bound to have a penis). Irigaray (1984/1993) offers us an
          alternative scriptural metaphor in her consideration of the two bodies, of the sexual
          difference that she constructs as the foundation for an ethic or relations. Her ac-
          count, in fact, shows us how, through embrace of the Other (mutual embrace, not a
          “disguised version of the master-slave relationship,” p. 17), we can achieve a kind of
          celebratory transcendence.
               Is it possible to have a postmodern view of community? Carolyn Miller
          (1984/1993), Iris Marion young (1990), and Lester Faigley (1992) have all pointed the
          way to such a vision of community. In a discussion linking communitarian and
          rhetoric theory, Miller (1993) develops a vocabulary for talking about community in a
          way that highlights difference: Concepts like “the bazaar, the collage, the carnival,
          bricolage, pastiche, eccentrism, nomadism, diaspora, migration” (pp. 89-90) all sug-
          gest ways of thinking about social/communal events in a post-modern light. The com-
          munity does not have to be a Governing State, or a Majority consensus, but can be a
          gathering for the purpose of festival and play, a celebration of difference. The Internet
          could potentially be the site for such electronic communities, but only if we begin the
          process of constructing a cyberspace ethic that promotes it as such a site and recog-
          nizes that such a festival cannot proceed without some regard for the ethical.
               Miller (1993) does worry that a postmodern conception of community might
          “leave us with a community that is so fragmented, perforated, intermittent, and at-
          tenuated that it no longer performs any rhetorical work” (p. 91), but the answer to
           that is to work to construct, and reconstruct, communities (plural). The effort is on-
           going. She thinks that rhetoric must foreground community because it “is necessary
           both for emotional solidarity and for political action” (p. 91). I very much agree.
                Aristotle’s musical metaphor is a significant one. The terms community and unity
           suggest consensus, but that consensus should not be conceived as homogeneity.
           Consensus is to be understood here in the sense of harmony: The different sounds
           aligned and blended in a particular way will produce a pleasant sound, a more aes-
           thetically pleasing state than any of the individual parts. This kind of harmony is not
           the same as everyone playing the same sound, the same note, in the same key. All
           that produces is one loud blare, not music. Harmony is not homogeneity.
                So, let us work toward this: an electronic network promoting a social harmony
           that values the diversity of sounds, that celebrates differences for a common good we
           have to work to construct. If we can use writing to design a network that achieves the
           spiritual transcendence that Irigaray (1984/1993) hopes for, the third age of the “in-
           carnation of the spirit . . . the era of the wedding and the festival of the world” (pp.
           148-149), let us do it.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Summarize the distinction between power and domination.
             2. According to Porter's argument, explain what the relationship is between rhetoric and
                ethics.
                                    Porter   = Framing Postmodern Commitment and Solidarity     217


3. Describe the role of collaboration and interaction in Porter's ethic of postmodern com-
   mitment and solidarity.
4. Porter's ethical principles for professional writers are organized by two main categories:
   (a) the posture, position, or stance a writer takes in relation to her audience/
   readers/clients and (b) the procedures, processes, or ways the writer goes about her
   work. Use these two categories to plan how you will go about your work on one of the
   larger writing projects you have been assigned, or are working on elsewhere (e.g., an
  internship, another course, or at work).
5. Identify an example of domination in writing. (The example does not have to represent
   total domination, but can instead reflect aspects of domination.) Explain how it is an
   example of domination, referring to contextual, textual, and/or procedural details from
   the example. Then, discuss what a professional writer could do to eliminate, or at least
   significantly reduce, the domination.
                   CHAPTER 4

                   Projects
           1. Talking about ethics, even in relation to cases others have faced, is not the same as taking
              ethical action. But being prepared and able to take effective ethical action requires that we
              take time to examine it from a distance, so to speak. One way to examine ethical action is to
              talk about it in abstraction and as it relates to other instances. We can also learn a great deal
              about ethics and ethical action, without actually being faced with the concrete realities, by
              assuming the roles of others who are taking such action. This project asks you to take that
              intermediary step, to put yourself in the place of other writers faced with negotiating appro-
              priate ethical action.
                Assume the role of Just, the memo writer in Katz's opening example, as well as one other
                writer from any of the cases discussed in the articles from this chapter. Also, assume that you
                have adopted and are putting into practice Porter's ethical principles for professional writers.
                Speaking in the first person narrative, describe how you put Porter's ethical practice into ac-
                tion in both cases. In each narrative, examine what you have to do, the constraints and limi-
      SHHSKSHHOHSSEHSHHTHOSHHOSHSAHTSSEEHOHEOHHOHHSHOHTSHEHHHSHSTEHTOSELOS


                tations you face, and the emotional responses (e.g., fear, worry, or pride) you have toward
                the actions you are taking. Thus, you are writing a story of your ethical/rhetorical action.
                Then, write a separate commentary that analyzes how your revised professional writing prac-
                tice is similar to and different from the original case.
             . If we take it seriously that professional writing is ethical action, we should pay as much at-
               tention to developing phronesis and praxis as we do to developing techné and poiesis. All
               writing requires both, but too often we direct our attentions toward techn@/poiesis and let
               unreflective habits drive phronesis/praxis. The following client project requires you to shift
               your attention toward phronesis/praxis.
               In groups of three or four, locate a client on your campus or in your local community who
               has a writing project you could work on for them. If you can, locate projects that are well
               within your reach in terms of genre knowledge, rhetorical strategies needed, technical skills
               required for document production, and overall time needed to complete the project. Do,
               however, look for projects that require you to interact with several parties. For instance, con-
               structing a whole Web site for a campus organization would probably not be a good choice.
               Depending on your experience with Web page design and construction, though, creating a
               splash page only for the same campus organization may be a good choice.
               *   At the outset of the project, discuss and develop an ethical action plan delineating the
                   principles you agree will guide your interactions with the client and involved parties, as
                   well as among yourselves as a co-authoring group oe will probably be two related
                   but different plans).
               *   As you work through the project, each group member should keep a journal in which you
                   discuss judgments you have made, actions you have taken, and the reasoning behind
                   them. (Do not look for and focus on things that you see as “ethical dilemmas,” only; con-
                   sider actions such as discussing design options with an audience representative as an im-
                   portant action which you have judged to be good, based on a certain line of reasoning.)
               *   At the end of the project, write a co-authored report that summarizes and reflects on your
                   group’s ethical actions, judgments, and reasoning throughout the project. In addition to
                   turning in your report, the final client project, and your journals to your instructor, be pre-
                   pared to summarize and discuss your report with the class.
218
°
e
*
°
.
°
.
e
°
a




             Professional Writing as
             Technologically
             situated Action

     INTRODUCTION
SSTSTHOHHSHTEHHHHTHSSEHSHOKTHSHOHEHEBEHEEEBOS




     The readings in Chapter 5 highlight some of the issues related to the technological
     contexts in which professional writing practice takes place. When writing is under-
     stood as only a way of producing something, technologies are understood as mere
     “tools” to help us get things done (or tools that get in the way of getting things done).
     Approaching writing from this direction, technological issues focus on how to use X
     tool, what Y tool is good for, and when a writer might want to use Z tool.
          When writing is understood, also, as a social practice, technologies become more
     than mere tools; they become part of the context in which writing takes place.
     Approaching writing from this second direction, technological issues broaden. Tool-
     focused issues are still important. For instance, one still must address how to use
     HTML, what HTML           is good for, and when a writer might want to use HTML. But
     other issues also arise, like how does writing in HTML change the writing process,
     the writer’s relationship with a reader, and what we mean by “written texts.” From
     this broader perspective, professional writing does not merely involve using techno-
     logical tools; professional writing becomes a social practice that is situated within
     technological contexts. In order to increase your awareness of and sensitivity to the
     impact of technological contexts, keep the following questions in mind as your read
     the selections in Chapter 5:
          ¢ What is the relationship between technological context and writing processes?
          ¢ What is the relationship between technological context and writer-reader in-
            teractions?
          ¢ In what ways do technological contexts affect what we understand as “written
            texts”?
          e How do technological contexts affect our definitions of what writers do and
            what writers must know?




                                                                                                 219
220   Chapter 5 #® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               One of the best ways to increase awareness of the impact technological context
          has on professional writing is to defamiliarize the technological contexts that have
          become “natural” to us. James Kalmbach’s “Publishing Before Computers” helps to
          defamiliarize our current contexts by describing a familiar process—writing and pub-
          lishing—in unfamiliar contexts. Reading about how writing and publishing were
          practiced in technological contexts that pre-date desktop computers clarifies how our
          current technological contexts affect things like writing process and writer-reader re-
          lationships.
               In addition to looking back at how technological contexts affect the work of pro-
          fessional writers, we can and should look forward to explore how future technological
          contexts may influence who writers are and what writers do. Instead of putting all of
          the bulleted questions above in the present tense, consider them in the future tense
          (e.g., what will be the relationship between tomorrow’s possible technological con-
          texts and the writing process’). Professional writers need to look ahead in this way,
          not only so they are prepared for what is to come, but also because by looking ahead
          and understanding the impact technological contexts have on writing, professional
          writers can be active in shaping the technologies that will later shape them and their
           work. Stephen Bernhardt models this looking-ahead in “The Shape of Texts to
           Come: The Texture of Print on Screens,” even though what he wrote about circa
           1992 seems quite natural to us today.
                One additional article, by Tharon Howard, examines one way technology com-
           plicates authorship. Copyright is often misunderstood as a way to protect authors’ in-
           dividual ideas, and often seen as a principle uncomplicated by context. Howard first
           corrects our historical understanding of copyright and then examines how electronic
           media complicate who is the “author” of electronic texts.



           PORFTOREROEHETHHHEHHHEERYOEHRTUTEVHR    *   *   SHREHHOHRERSESHOGED   SOGTHEKHHHHSHHHERHORSMDHLOSEES


              FOCUSING ON KEY                 TERMS AND CONCEPTS
             Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
             Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
             lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
             in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
             the field itself.
             1. publishing as action
             2. letterpress
             3. typography
             4. lithography
             5. xerography
             6. desktop publishing
             7. economies of scale
                                                                            Kalmbach   *® Publishing Before Computers      221

 PR   OCHR RAHM AEE               eo                           ©    ae oe



      PUBLISHING BEFORE ComPuTERS
 POPSYHESSOOH         ASHE SHREC ESHEETS   ROA   HEAT   HBOS   2%    SSUP*KeHOKDeERTOKUSEHRRESS


      JAMES R. KALMBACH

We            and writing systems are forms of technology (Ong, 1982). They are tech-
       nologies in terms of how written symbols represent the sound system of a lan-
guage, and they are technologies in terms of how those symbols are formed, pre-
served, and transmitted.! Publishing as action is, in its essence, an interplay between
social forces and technological resources. The nature of publishing at any point in
history is shaped by the actions people wish to take and the technological resources
available to express those actions in writing. Over the years, publishing and the tech-
nologies for publishing have evolved from a limited, conserving activity to a perva-
sive form of social transaction. This evolution has always been in the direction of in-
creasing expressiveness of written text, increasing availability of technology, and
increasing interactivity.
     This chapter traces the evolution of publishing technology from the invention of
the alphabet in ancient Greece through to Xerox’s introduction of the plain paper
copier in 1960. It compresses several thousand years of innovation into a few brief
pages. The goal of the argument is not to explicate these technologies in detail, but
to show that even though the technologies change the ways in which these technolo-
gies are used, the social forces they respond to have remained fairly constant.


THE INVENTION OF THE ALPHABET
The alphabetic writing system, first developed in Greece around the 9th century
(Gelb, 1963), is the original technology of publishing. Prior to the alphabet, writing
systems were limited in the range of meanings they could communicate. Havelock
(1974) suggests that the prealphabetic syllabic writing systems, which attempted to
represent in print the actual, physically heard syllables of a language, could only com-
municate a limited range of texts. The inherent ambiguity of these writing systems
made it difficult for readers to decode unique ideas.” Instead, topics were limited to
those that were familiar and predictable to the reader:
        The record of a culture which is composed under these restrictions is likely to center upon
        religion and myth, for these tend to codify and standardize the variety of human experi-
        ence so that the reader of such scripts is more likely to recognize what the writer is talking
        about (p. 35)




Source: The Computer and the Page: Publishing, Technology, and the Classroom, James R. Kalmbach,      "Publishing Before
Computers,” 1997, pp. 55-69. Copyright 1997 by Ablex, a division of Greenwood Publishing Group. Reproduced with per-
mission of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc., Westport, CT.
 | “The term ‘writing’ describes a series of technological devices which . . . assist the user in an act of recogni-
tion” (Havelock, 1974, p. 16).
2 “One sign [in syllabic writing systems] has to represent several sounds and the open choices left to the
reader . . become extensive” (Havelock, 1974, p. 31).
222   Chapter 5 # Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               In cultures dominated by these prealphabetic scripts, reading was restricted to
          specialists:
                Expected and recognizable discourse [in syllabic writing systems] becomes highly traditional
                both in form and content. Such traditionalism is characteristic of a craft, the secrets of
                which are carefully nurtured by its practitioners. The scribes who used these syllabaries were
                practitioners of this sort. The so-called literacy that they represent was craft literacy. (p. 37)

               Rather than a means of achieving social action, the limited access to literacy in
          prealphabetic writing systems and the difficulty of interpreting unique texts meant
          that literacy was primarily a means of acquiring and preserving power.
               The Grecian writing system’s central technological innovation was to abstract
          away from the real sounds that syllabic writing systems attempted to represent and in-
          stead use written symbols to represent an abstract unit of phonological structure: the
          phoneme.? It was a remarkable conceptual leap. Phonemes such as b, p, d, t, g, and k
          only exist in the abstract. They cannot be pronounced without an accompanying
          vowel.4 Separating vowels from consonants enabled the Greeks to limit the number
          of unique symbols in their writing system to under 30, while at the same time de-
          crease the ambiguity of the original texts. With a writing system that represented ab-
          stract phonological structure rather than real speech, it was possible to write down
          (and to read) original texts. Writing systems were no longer solely a means of preserv-
          ing traditional texts. They could be used to create new ideas and to communicate
          those ideas to others. New technologies enabled the Greeks to use written language
           in new ways. The result, Havelock (1974) argues, was literacy and the literate basis of
           modern thought.
                As Lanham (1993), Ong (1982), and others have argued, alphabetic writing also
          introduced a fundamental dichotomy into Western civilization. On the one hand, al-
          phabetic texts were an even better substitute for memory (Ong, 1982) than were ear-
          lier forms of writing. As a result, longer more diverse texts could be recorded and pre-
          served. On the other hand, the fact that alphabetic writing and reading were
          relatively easy to learn and could be used to record and communicate original
          thoughts made alphabetic writing a means of resisting this conserving tendency. We
          have struggled ever since with this tension between the conserving and creative
          functions of writing (Perkinson, 1995).


           FROM ORAL TO SILENT READING
           The scribes in the Middle Ages who inherited the Greek tradition of alphabetic writ-
           ing were clearly in the conserving camp. They saw themselves not as creators or pub-
           lishers of new texts, but as keepers of great texts from past eras; “One of the main
           functions of the monastic institutions of the Middle Ages was to preserve manu-


            3 A phoneme is the minimal unit of sound that changes the meaning of a word. Phonemes differ from language
           to language. Spit and pit are the same p phoneme in English even though one p is pronounced with a puff of air
           and the other is not. In Arabic languages, these two p sounds are separate phonemes.
            4 These sounds are called stops because they “stop” the vibrating column of air created by a vowel or semi-
           vowel. Stop consonants cannot be pronounced except in combination with other sounds because without the
           vibrating air there is nothing to stop.
                                                                  Kalmbach       ® Publishing Before Computers      223


scripts and produce good copies, cleaned of the errors made by weary copyists of the
past” (Smith, 1980, p. 5). Their task was to preserve, reproduce, and interpret these
texts. Perhaps because of this role as guardians of great texts, scribal publishing also
elevated the book-as-a-work-of-art to its highest level.5
     This conserving role began to break down during the Middle Ages as the act of
reading gradually transformed from an oral, communal act into a silent, individual
process (Saenger, 1982). Reading for the Greeks and later the Romans meant reading
out loud: a slave reading to a master or one person reading to a group. Oral reading
was largely mandated by the technology of the writing system. Visible texts were ren-
dered in all-capital letters with no spaces between words and no punctuation. Such
texts, Saenger argues, were designed to be a transcription of spoken language that was
best read orally:
      The Roman reader, reading aloud to others or softly to himself, approached the text sylla-
      ble by syllable in order to recover the words and sentences conveying the meaning of the
      text. ... A written text was essentially a transcription which, like modern musical nota-
      tion, became an intelligible message only when it was performed orally to others or to
      oneself. (p. 371)

     Oral reading of such texts must have been physically exhausting and reading for
meaning a constant challenge. Even with contemporary typefaces, one can get a
sense of the challenge they faced when lower case letters, word spaces, and punctua-
tion are stripped away from a text. The following passage is the opening of Jay Bolter’s
Writing Spaces, set in a Roman style:
      INVICTORHUGOSNOVELNOTREDAMEDEPARIS1482THEPRIESTREMARKEDC-
      ECITUERACELATHISBOOKWILLDESTROYTHATBUILDINGHEMEANTNOTON-
      LYTHATPRINTINGANDLITERACY WOULDUNDERMINETHEAUTHROITY-
      OFTHECHURCHBUTALSOTHATHUMANTHOUGHTWOULDCHANGEITSMO
      DEOFEXPRESSIONTHATTHEPRINCIPALIDEAOFEACHGENERATIONWOULD-
      NOLONGERWRITEITSELFWITHTHESAMEMATERIALANDINTHESAME-
      WAYTHAT THEBOOKOFSTONESOSOLIDANDDURABLEWOULDGIVEPLACE-
      TOTHEBOOKMADEOFPAPERYETMORESOLIDANDDURABLE
     Could you read the passage silently, or did you read it quietly to yourself, pro-
nouncing the text syllable by syllable, sacrificing meaning to make sound-letter cor-
relations? Do you remember any of what you read, or does your head ache and your
eyes hurt? Such text clearly privileges oral, linear reading.
     The principle innovation that made silent reading possible in the Middle Ages
was the insertion of spaces between words (Saenger, 1982). Notice how much easier
the Bolter passage is to read with these spaces:
     IN VICTOR HUGOS NOVEL NOTRE DAME DE PARIS 1482 THE PRIEST RE-
     MARKED CECI TUERA CELA THIS BOOK WILL DESTROY THAT BUILDING
     HE MEANT NOT ONLY THAT PRINTING AND LITERACY WOULD UNDER-
     MINE THE AUTHROITY OF THE CHURCH BUT ALSO THAT HUMAN
     THOUGHT WOULD CHANGE ITS MODE OF EXPRESSION THAT THE PRINCI-
     PAL IDEA OF EACH GENERATION WOULD NO LONGER WRITE ITSELF WITH

5 The Book of Kells, a gorgeously illustrated biblical codex completed around 800, is a national treasure for the
Irish (Olmert, 1992, p. 92).
224   Chapter 5 = Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



                THE SAME MATERIAL AND IN THE SAME WAY THAT THE BOOK OF STONE
                SO SOLID AND DURABLE WOULD GIVE PLACE TO THE BOOK MADE OF PA-
                PER YET MORE SOLID AND DURABLE

               The addition of word spacing enabled readers to group words into meaningful
          units, to skim texts to locate specific passages of interest, and to predict what would
          come next. The use of upper and lower case letters and punctuation as clues to gram-
          matical and semantic relationships, which made it easier for readers to infer syntactic
           and discourse-level structures, further encouraged the move toward silent, nonlinear
           reading (Levenston, 1992).6


          LETTERPRESS PRINTING
           One consequence of silent reading was a dramatic increase in the amount of text that
           a reader could process. Saenger (1982) reports that in the 12th-century cloister li-
           braries, books were lent out at Easter for a period of one year; “The lengthy loan pe-
           riod had reflected the slow pace of reading orally either to oneself or to others in
           small groups” (p. 396). As silent reading became more widespread, libraries had to in-
           crease their holdings to meet the demand for more texts: “In 1450, a university popu-
           lation which was approximately forty per cent smaller than it had been in 1300 was
           reading a much larger corpus of scholastic writing than had existed one hundred fifty
           years before” (p. 398). The traditional means of producing books by hand could not
           meet this demand.
                These parchment books were large and difficult to use. They were rare and
           closely guarded, often stored in enormous metal boxes (to keep the parchment pages
           flat) and chained to library shelves.
                 Moreover, creating books by hand was slow and labor intensive. Manuscript books
           were hard to find and harder still to purchase. Commercial trade in books was rare.
           Instead, the way to acquire books was to hire copyists to create them from scratch.’
                 The invention of letterpress printing by Johann Gutenberg in the mid-15th cen-
           tury came at a time when manuscript books were at their artistic height. When
           Gutenberg produced his 42-line Bible in 1455, he took fine hand-drawn letterforms
           as his models because he was competing with copyists, and quality letterforms were

            6 The consequences of this shift from oral to silent reading can still be seen today. There are more than 1,800
           words in English that are pronounced the same but spelled differently (there, they’re, their, etc.), but only about
           a half dozen words are spelled the same but pronounced differently (read and read). Homophones complicate
           sound-letter correspondences, but they make the process of identifying words in silent reading easier by signal-
           ing differences in meaning through differences in visual shape. Similarly, spelling patterns often preserve mean-
           ing at the expense of phonemic accuracy. The second o in photograph or photography represents two different
           phonemes (/o/ and /ae/), but keeping the spelling the same preserves the common meaning of the root word,
           which is an advantage in silent reading. Indeed typography and typographic variation also support silent read-
           ing. Whether a document is set in Times Roman or Helvetica has little effect on our ability to read that docu-
           ment out loud.
            7 Consider this description of how a 14th-century library was created: “When Cosimo de’Medici was in a hurry
           to form a library . . . he sent for Vespasiano, and received from him the advice to give up all thoughts of pur-
           chasing books, since those that were worth getting could not be had easily, but rather to make use of the copy-
           ists; whereupon Cosimo bargained to pay him so much a day and Vespasiano, with fifty-five writers under him,
           delivered 200 volumes in twenty-two months” (quoted in Chappell, 1970/1980, pp. 36-37).
                                                                  Kalmbach       ® Publishing Before Computers    225


what would appeal to patrons.’ However, at the same time, he was developing a tech-
nology that could meet the growing demand for printed materials.
     Although the scribes no doubt complained bitterly that these newfangled
“printed” books were degrading the visual and tactile quality of handwritten books,
they could not compete with, the speed, precision, and economy of the letterpress. In
the first 50 years after the invention of movable type, more books were printed (ap-
proximately 10 to 20 million) than had ever been produced before Gutenberg (Craig
& Banton, 1987). Because of movable type, books became a commodity, an object of
commerce, increasing the availability of printed documents for everyday users.
     Letterpress printing may have established bookmaking as a commercial rather
than an artistic or conserving activity, but printing was still a slow, labor-intensive
process. Letterforms had to be cut in steel, matrices built, and then typecast from
molten lead. Signatures had to be hand-composed, the press made ready, and paper
hand-fed into and then pulled off the press. As a consequence, only the most signifi-
cant manuscripts found their way into print—religious or political documents that
printers thought would sell or that a patron was willing to commission.
     Before the invention of movable type, all documents were created by hand; after
the invention of printing, most documents were still produced by hand.? Letterpress
printing was a technology best used to create many copies of a few documents rather
than a few copies of many documents. Letterpress printing helped establish publish-
ing as a commercial activity and made mass literacy possible by producing the books,
newspapers, and pamphlets that gave people something to read, but it continued to
limit access to the tools of publishing.
    Letterpress printing also reinforced the dichotomy between “the book” as some-
thing to be bought, sold, and valued and the “everyday document” as something
ephemeral and handwritten, to be used and discarded. Between the typeset, printed
book and the everyday handwritten document lay an enormous station of opportu-
nity.!° Not surprisingly, inventors tried to fill that gap with machines that would be
fast and simple enough to set type by hand. The first of those machines was the type-
writer.

THE TYPEWRITER'!
From its beginning, the typewriter had been conceived as a publishing device, an al-
ternative to handwriting for everyday publishers. This intent is clear from the first
patent application in 1714 by Henry Mill in England: “An artificial machine or

 8 As a result the quality of that first Bible was remarkably high. Chappell (1970/1980) has argued that “it is
possible to put the best piece of contemporary printing beside the Gutenberg Bible, and to compare the two
without any concession being asked for the latter because it was produced more than five hundred years ago”
(p. 19).
 9 Olmert (1992) devotes a whole chapter, “Debits and Credits: The Keeping of Accounts,” to the topic of me-
dieval everyday handwritten documents, including ledgers, court records, parish registers, wills, and insurance
inventories.
10 This dichotomy continues in contemporary discussions of electronic publishing that single out the book
(rather than the newspaper or the magazine) as the primary artifact of print culture (see Bolter, 1991; Landow,
1992).
!! The material in the next two sections is adapted from Kalmbach (1988a).
226   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          method for the impressing or transcribing of letters... whereby all writings whatso-
          ever may be engrossed in paper or parchment so neat and exact as not to be distin-
          guished from print” (quoted in Blanchard, 1981, p. E-2).
               No drawing or models exist of Mill’s machine. It would be another 150 years be-
          fore typewriters were commercially feasible. The first American patent for a type-
          writer was issued in 1829 to William Austin Burt. He called his machine “Burt’s
          Family Letter Press.” The first commercial typewriter was marketed in 1852 by John
          Jones. His advertising copy suggests that he was going squarely after what we today
          would call the desktop publishing market:
               It may be advantageously used in localities remote from Printing Offices, for printing
               advertisements, handbills, circulars, cards, etc,... It is easily managed, and any child
               that can read will, with a few hours practice, print accurately. (quoted in Blanchard,
               1981, p. E-9)
               Although these 19th-century entrepreneurs hoped to bring the power of typogra-
          phy and letterpress printing to everyday users, they could not deliver a machine that
          matched their vision. Christopher Latham Scholes developed the first commercially
          successful typewriter in the 1870s by placing individual letters on separate bars. Each
          bar was activated by its own key—a move that improved speed but severely limited
          the quality and variety of letterforms.
               Scholes’s machine could use only one typeface, and that first model offered only
          all-capital letters. (The shift key, which made possible the inclusion of upper and
          lower case letterforms on a single typebar, did not appear for another two years.) For
          the typebars to function without jamming, each character had to be allotted an equal
           amount of space, and the characters had to be made visually simple so that they
           would reproduce accurately. Even so, image quality was uneven and spacing erratic.
           Those early typists could not even see what they were typing. The typebars were
           arranged in a circle beneath the platen, and text did not emerge until six lines after it
           was typed. Although the early typewriter entrepreneurs may well have dreamed of a
           desktop publishing market, it was Scholes’s ability to deliver inexpensive, consistent
           speed rather than visual quality that made the typewriter a success (see Walker,
           1984).
                Like today’s proponents of computers, desktop publishing, and hypertext, propo-
           nents of the typewriter were quick to get carried away in promoting this new technol-
           ogy. As early as 1872, Ely Beach announced the following in the pages of Scientific
           American:
               [The Scholes typewriter] requires no especial skill in its manipulation. A child knowing
               its letters may use it after an hour’s instruction, and indeed any one, after short practice,
               can easily become able to write from 60 to 80 words per minute. (quotes in Blanchard,
               1981, p. E-26)
                Along the same vein, in 1922, James Collins speculated about the typewriter’s
           likely effect on printers:
               The first inventors thought the typewriter would take the place of a pen—write letters
               and copy documents faster. But people quickly saw that, by using carbon paper, they could
               write several copies of a letter or document. That proved to be a fine thing. Thinner paper
               gave more copies, but not as many as its users wanted. Then Edison invented the mimeo-
                                                        Kalmbach    #8 Publishing Before Computers   227

    graph, by which the typewriter could write a stencil on waxed paper, and from that, thou-
    sands of copies were made. The printers were frightened! If a girl with a typewriter could
    make thousands of circulars, who would want printed circulars? (p. 493)

     Unfortunately, no matter how much inventors and futurists promoted the type-
writer, it could still only produce one page at a time. Typewriters were limited pub-
lishing devices. They offered an alternative to handwriting only when one copy was
needed (or, with carbon paper, a few copies), but typewriters were not an alternative
when multiple copies were needed. The gap between the high-end publishing on a
letterpress and the low end publishing of a typewriter-driven office continued to be
large and largely empty. Not until after World War II did the technologies of offset
printing—photo-offset lithography and its electrostatic cousin xerography—fill that
gap by moving reproduction from a mechanical to a chemical and eventually an elec-
trostatic basis.


LITHOGRAPHY
Lithography was invented in 1796 by Aloys Senefelder, a struggling Bavarian play-
wright and musician. No one would publish his stuff so he decided to print it himself.
Letterpress printing was beyond his means, so he began to experiment with alterna-
tive printing methods. According to the no doubt apocryphal story, Senefelder had
just prepared a piece of limestone for etching when his mother asked him to write a
laundry list for her. The laundress was waiting and there was no paper or writing ink
nearby, so he wrote the list with lampblack on the clean stone. Later, he discovered,
largely by chance, that the waxy lampblack could be transferred directly from the
stone to paper. Senefelder had discovered an alternative to letterpress printing.
Instead of creating images mechanically by pressing paper against type, he could
transfer an image chemically (Lawson, 1963).
     Senefelder named his new process lithography from the Greek for “stone writing”
and abandoned the arts to develop and promote his invention. During the 19th cen-
tury, lithographic stones were used to produce color prints and other illustrations.
Mechanized lithographic presses were introduced in the 1840s. Photography was first
used to transfer images to stone in 1857, and the offset principle of first transferring
an image to a rubber blanket and then from the blanket to paper was introduced in
1875. These different innovations were first combined in 1905 with the rotary offset
press (Lawson, 1963).
     Pocket Pal (1984), the classic reference guide for the print industry, describes the
modern process of offset lithography as follows:
    Lithography uses the planographic method. . . . Printing is from a plane or flat surface, and
    there are two basic differences between offset lithography and other processes: (1) it is
    based on the principle that grease and water do not mix, and (2) ink is offset first from the
    plate to a rubber blanket, and then from the blanket to the paper.
        When the printing plate is made, the printing image is rendered grease receptive and
    water repellant, while the non-printing areas are rendered water receptive and ink repel-
    lant. On the press, the plate is mounted on the plat cylinder which, as it rotates, comes
    into contact successively with rollers wet by water or dampening solution, and rollers wet
    by ink. The dampening solution west the non-printing areas of the plate and prevents the
228   Chapter 5 =    Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



                ink from wetting these areas. The ink wets the image areas ‘which are transferred to the
                intermediate blanket cylinder. The paper picks up the image as it passes between the
                blanket cylinder and the impression cylinder. (p. 28)
                This offset process involves three essential steps:
                1. A plate containing the image to be produced is treated in some manner so that
                   ink is attracted by the image area and repelled by the nonimage area.
                2. The image is offset from the plate to a secondary medium such as blanket.
                3. The image is transferred from the blanket to paper.
               Because an image is transferred from plate to blanket to paper, the plates used for
          offset lithographic printing can be made from materials that could not otherwise
          withstand the stress of imaging directly onto paper. In particular, paper plates for off-
          set lithography were developed that could be imaged by hand or with typewriters.
          More popular and more effective, however, were metal or bi-metal aluminum plates
          that were imaged by various photographic processes.
               Creating plates by photographic reproduction (rather than by hand or with a
          typewriter) had a number of advantages. When a plate wore out, an exact duplicate
          could be created photographically. Errors could be corrected on the original copy
          rather than on the plate or on the press. Perhaps, more significant, photographic re-
          production freed graphic designers from the need to square lead type and slugs into a
          letterpress form. Anything that could be put on a piece of paper could be pho-
          tographed and then printed.
               Despite these advantages, lithographic presses were not widely used until after
          World War II. During the early 20th century, offset printers had to use a linotype ma-
          chine to set type, pull a proof of that type off a proofing press, and then use that type
           to create a page (Kleper, 1976).
               One alternative to hot lead were typewriter-like systems, often referred to as
          “cold type.” These systems were based on a technology of interchangeable type ele-
          ments that had originally been introduced in the 1870s to compete with Schole’s
          typebar machine.!2 The cold-type typewriters that inherited this technology offered
          excellent typographic controls and a reasonable selection of typeface, although with
          limited type sizes.
               Of these cold-type typewriters, one of the best was the IBM Composer.
           Introduced in 1966, the Composer offered excellent intraletter and interlinear con-
          trols with 11 true typefaces ranging from 6 to 12 points and an image quality that was
          outstanding: dense, black, consistent type that was easily comparable to or better
          than an all-text page from a laser printer.3
               Regardless of this quality, cold-type typewriters were limited typesetting devices,
          and the potential of offset printing remained largely untapped until inventors figured
          out how to image letterforms directly onto photographic paper, a process called
          phototypesetting. The first phototypesetters were introduced in the late 1940s. They
          were slow, mechanical devices that operated much like their hot lead parents. The

           !2 Typewheel typewriters generally offered better image quality than typebar typewriters, but until IBM per-
           fected their Selectric electric typewriter, type wheels could not compete with typebars on speed.
           13 Carte (1974), for example, advocated using an IBM Selectric Composer for “final repro typing” of technical
           manuals to provide readers with much more professional looking documents.
                                                                Kalmbach      ® Publishing Before Computers   229


second generation of machines began appearing in the mid-1950s with the Photon
oe The third generation, using cathode tube technology, began appearing 10 years
 ater.                     ,
     The marriage of photographically produced type with photographically imaged
printing plates has made offset lithography a dominate commercial printing technol-
ogy. Letterpress, gravure, and other forms of printing continue largely as niche tech-
nologies. Photo-offset lithography, in the form of small table-top duplicators, also
found its way into commercial and nonprofit organizations for in-house print shops.
Today, however, such in-house printing has been all but replaced by a different form
of offset: electrostatic printing.


XEROGRAPHY
Electrostatic printing (more commonly known as xeroxing) is the process used in most
photocopy machines and laser printers. The Xerox machine’s story is a classic tale of
American business. An inventor working in his kitchen, a small company persever-
ing in the face of skepticism and outright disbelief, and a product—the Xerox 914—
combined to change the way we do work.
     The process of electrostatic printing was invented by Chester Carlson in 1938.!4
Carlson had graduated from Cal Tech with a degree in Physics in 1930 just as the de-
pression was beginning. He could not find employment as a physicist so he moved to
New York, where he worked as a clerk in the patent department of a law firm. His pri-
mary tasks involved recopying manuscripts and preparing photostats of drawings for
patent applications. Convinced that there had to be a better way, he converted his
kitchen to a laboratory and set out to find a way to use photo conductivity to repro-
duce an image. The process Carlson discovered was complicated and tedious:
     The Carlson process essentially broke down into five steps. First, a special photo conduc-
     tive surface was given an electrostatic charge [in early demonstrations Carlson rubbed the
     material with a piece of fur] which it could hold only in the dark. Once exposed to light,
     the charge would disappear. Next a printed page was placed in close proximity to this sur-
     face and light was shone on it so that an image of the printing was projected onto the sur-
     face. (Because of the light, the surface kept its charge only in those places occupied by the
     dark ink.) The third step was to dust the surface with powdered ink, which stuck to the
     charged portions, creating a mirror image of the printed page. This image was then trans-
     ferred to a blank sheet of paper. Finally, to make it permanent, heat was applied which
     melted the ink and fused it to the page. (Kearns & Nadler, 1992, p. 18)

     Carlson worked for years refining and promoting his invention. He convinced
the Battelle Memorial Institute to invest in the process, and they in turn interested
Haloid, a small photo paper company from Rochester, NY to invest.
     In 1948, Haloid produced its first product based on Carlson’s process: a large
flatbed copier. The machine, however, was difficult to operate. A skilled operator had
to go through over a dozen separate steps to complete a single copy. Haloid sent eval-
uation versions of the copier out to large companies. The machines all came back

14 The first words ever photocopied were the date and place of the event, “10-22-38 Astoria.” This landmark
copy is reproduced by Kearns and Nadler (1992).
230   Chapter 5 = Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          with notes of apology to the effect that the process was just-too difficult and messy for
          office use. Things looked bleak until someone from Battelle suggested that the ma-
          chine might be used to image paper plates for offset lithography as press operators
          were used to running complicated, messy machinery. Haloid sent more prototypes
          out, this time to press rooms. Soon a major automobile manufacturer reported that
          whereas it cost them $3.12 to produce an offset page using a zinc plate, that page
          could be printed for 37¢ using a paper plate created with a Xerox plate maker, and
          that plate could image up to 20,000 copies.!®
               Haloid began marketing the Xerox paper plate maker, and throughout the 1950s,
          profits from the plate maker financed their efforts to bring out a plain paper office
          copier. That machine, the Xerox 914, was introduced in March 1960, 22 years after
          Carlson had invented the xeroxgraphic process. Haloid had learned from their diff-
          culties with flatbed copiers. To use the 914, a user had only to put a sheet of paper
           face down on the glass, twist a dial for the number of copies (up to 15), and then press
          a button. Fifteen seconds later a copy emerged.!¢
               In addition to making their copier easy to use, Haloid’s most important innova-
          tion was to lease rather than to sell the 914 and to charge a per-page cost for copies.
          The machines were extremely expensive to make and would have been difficult to
          sell but for the fact that for only $100 per month anyone could lease one and make
          2,000 free copies. After that, copies cost 4 cents. The plan was truly elegant; both
          large and small businesses could afford the same machine and pay according to their
          usage. Even better, the need to make copies seemed to feed itself. Unlimited copies of
          documents was one of those things people did not know they needed until they had a
           copier in their office. Haloid originally projected that each 914 copier would generate
           10,000 copies a month. The actual number proved to be closer to 40,000. A cash cow
           was born. Largely on the back of a single product, Haloid was transformed from a
           small Rochester photographic paper maker into a major international technology
           company. From 1959 to 1968, Xerox (they changed the name in recognition of the
           success of the product) went from annual sales of $32 million to $1.25 billion.
                The critical innovation in xerography was eliminating the plate (and, of course,
           plate preparation) from the reproduction process. With a Xerox machine, the origi-
           nal paper document also served as the plate. The operator simply puts the original on
           the glass and presses a button. The image on the paper is then optically translated
           into a negative electrostatic charge on a drum. This drum rotates through a bath of
           positively charged toner. The toner is attracted to the negatively charged areas of a
           drum. The drum then transfers this toner to a piece of paper, and the toner and paper
           are heat-sealed together.
                Plate preparation is a tedious and expensive component of traditional offset
           printing. The original document has to be photographed to create a line negative (in
           which any black areas of the original page are clear and any white areas are black).
           Flaws in the line negative are opaqued. The negative is then “stripped” or taped onto
           a sheet of golden rod paper (from which rectangular boxes have been cut for each

           '5 |t was perhaps the first report of using desktop publishing technology to save money by sacrificing quality.
           16 To prove the machine was easy to use, Xerox produced a television commercial in which a businessman asks
           his 6-year-old daughter to make a copy for him. She happily skips off. When she comes back, he asks her which
           is the original and which the copy, she scratches her head and says, “I forget.”
                                                    Kalmbach    ® Publishing Before Computers   231


type block). The stripped negative is then attached to a photosensitive plate, and the
two are exposed to an intense light. The image that the light has etched onto the
plate is developed with chemicals, and the plate is coated with lacquer. All these
steps have to be done for each plate before that plate can be mounted on a press and
adjusted for printing.      ,
     The advantage of a plate, however, is that it can produce thousands to hundred
of thousands of copies. Consequently, the cost of preparing that plate can be prorated
across the number of copies needed. As the number goes up, the plate’s cost per copy
goes down. Because a photocopy machine does not use a plate, the cost to create a
copy never changes. If the effective cost of creating one copy is 5¢, then the effective
cost of creating 100 copies is $5 and the effective cost of creating 1,000 copies is $50.
The cost of creating a few documents is quite reasonable, but at some point it be-
comes cheaper to print documents by offset lithography than it does to use a photo-
copy machine. Because of these differing economies of scale, chemical-based offset
printing and electrostatically based photocopy machines are complimentary rather
than competing technologies. Electrostatic printing can produce small numbers of
copies inexpensively, but costs mount as copies increase. Offset lithographic printing
can produce large numbers of copies inexpensively, but its cost per page to create
small numbers is high.
     The economic balance point between offset and xerographic printing has, how-
ever, been shifting. When I was in college, in the early 1970s, the quality of photo-
copy machines could not compare with offset printing. We could justify the cost of
offset printing if we needed 100 or more high-quality copies. Today, unless special pa-
per, halftones, or color are needed, the decision point is closer to 10,000 copies.
Current machines produce not only black, text-only pages of quality comparable to
offset printing, but they can print on both sides of the page and collate and bind mul-
tipage documents. A set of master pages is put in one end and a bound booklet
emerges from the other.
     Together the technologies of photo-offset lithography and electrostatic photo-
copying have helped to shape the information age we now live in. Before, if someone
wanted copies of a document, he or she could copy or retype the document by hand,
go to a printer and have the work reset and then printed. There was little choice in
between. Today anything can be inexpensively printed, and virtually anyone who
can put words or images on paper can get those words or images reproduced at a li-
brary, grocery store, or laundromat.
     A number of information processing occupations (such as technical writing, pro-
posal writing, public relations, etc.) owe their existence in large part to the offset rev-
olution. The major genres of documents that today drive desktop publishing—
newsletters, brochures, fliers, booklets, and so on—all became popular because of
offset’s flexibility. How many brochures would be received in the mail if each was set
in hot lead type? How many manuals would be produced, and how useful would they
be? Just as letterpress printing democratized literacy by making written texts available
to a larger number of people, offset printing—in the form of small duplicators, photo-
copy machines, and laser printers—has made publishing as social action available to
virtually anyone.
     New purposes for published have come to supplement older ones as the tech-
nologies for creating and distributing copies have changed. Publishing evolved from a
232   Chapter 5 #® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action


           preserving activity to a commercial activity as literacy levels increased and access to
           printed texts became widespread. Offset technologies such as lithography and xerog-
           raphy made the tools for creating copies even more widely available, but it would
           take an additional technology—the computer—to make publishing part of society’s
           everyday transactions through writing. . . .

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Analyze how technology affects who reads, what gets written, and why texts are written.
                Use three technologies, including the Web, as examples.
             2. Kalmbach, in this article, does not pay particular attention to the ways technologies affect
                the writer's work (e.g., where the writer works, the writer's function/role, who the writer
                writes to/for, who employs the writer, the prestige of the writer, and the writer's routine
                tasks). Briefly trace, through the technological history represented by Kalmbach, the ways
                technologies have affected the professional writer's work, and predict some of the ways
                near-future technologies might affect your work as a professional writer.
             3. Describe the ways economic issues like cost, supply, demand, and economies of scale
                have driven the development and use of writing technologies, as well as the decay and
                elimination of others. Explain how these economic variables and the availability of such
                automated features as brochure design templates, grammar check, and fit-to-page com-
                mands can both enhance and threaten the professional writer's work.



             Pees   eoeseneaeea   SAREE   OCRHAREDESOEHTS       SUTSLSOSERSHSHHEHFTHSHEHEHFCHERHHROSH
                                                                                         RES EHH HORECSHESEREE


              FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. task-oriented reading
              2. interactivity
              3. functional mapping
              4. modularity
              5. navigational strategies

            SOCSHSEATETHHRESOSORHHHETHAH        HE                 COHHASHSCHSSFHAFHHCHOHRF
                                                                            CSO HHHKRSRHEKSHFOE SH HOEERTOSSE OHO RHE



               THE SHAPE OF> Pexe 7TO COME: THE
               TEXTURE OF PRINT ON SCREENS
             ‘STEPHEN A. BERNHARDT

                hanges in the technology of text invariably trigger changes in the shape of text.
                Texts are undergoing monumental transformation as the medium of presentation


           Source: Bernhardt, Stephen A. “The Shape of Text to Come: The Texture Print on Screens.”   College Composition and
           Communication 44 (May 1993), pp. 151-175. Copyright 1993 by the National Council of Teachers of English. Reprinted
           with permission.
                    Bernhardt   = The Shape of Text to Come:      The Texture of Print on Screens   233


shifts from paper to screen. We need to constantly appraise the broad drifts in the
shape of text—to anticipate what now constitutes and what will soon constitute a
well-formed text. We need to think about how readers interact with text—what they
do with it and how. We need to anticipate where text is going: the shape of text to
come.                       :
     This paper suggests some of the dimensions of change in how text is structured
on the page and on the screen. It is necessarily speculative, since the topic is just be-
ginning to receive systematic attention (Bolter; Brockmann; Horton; Kostelnick;
Merrill; Rubens, “A Reader’s View” and “Online Information”; Rubens and Krull;
Special Issue of Visible Language 1984).
     We have a good theoretical understanding and a highly developed practical art
of the rhetoric and text structure of paper documents, and this praxis exerts a strong
shaping influence over texts produced via electronic media. We are in a state of rapid
evolution, with heavy borrowing on the history of text on paper, applied sometimes
appropriately and sometimes inappropriately to the new medium. Because electronic
text does not create a totally new rhetoric but depends for its design on the strategies
of paper texts, the starting point in this analysis is not “How do screen-based texts
differ categorically or essentially from their paper-based counterparts?” but “What is a
framework for understanding dimensions of variation in texts across the two media?”
     This paper uses a text analytical approach to identify nine dimensions of varia-
tion that help map the differences between paper and on-screen text. Screen-based
text tends to exploit these dimensions to a greater degree than does paper text.
    To a relatively greater extent, then, on-screen text tends to be:
    Situationally Embedded: The text doesn’t stand alone but is bound up within the context
    of situation—the ongoing activities and events that make the text part of the action.
    Interactive: The text invites readers to actively engage with it—both mentally and physi-
    cally—trather than passively absorb information.
    Functionally Mapped: The text displays itself in ways that cue readers as to what can be
    done with it.
    Modular:   The text is composed     and presented   in self-contained chunks, fragments,
    blocks.
    Navigable: The text supports reader movement across large pools of information in differ-
    ent directions for different readers and purposes.
    Hierarchically Embedded: The text has different levels or layers of embedding; text con-
    tains other texts.
    Spacious: The text is open, unconstrained by physicality.
    Graphically Rich: The text exploits and integrates graphic display to present information
    and facilitate interaction.

    Customizable and Publishable: The text is fluid, changing, dynamic; the new tools of texts
    make every writer a publisher.

     As academics with a commitment to certain kinds of discourse, we may not see as
desirable all of these developments in the ways text is structured, but they appear to
234   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          be inevitable. We need first to understand the directions that computers are taking
          written language, and then to consider these changes as we teach our students strate-
          gies for reading and writing text in a new age.


          SITUATIONALLY EMBEDDED TEXT
          When people voice doubts about whether computers will take the place of books,
          they are generally expressing doubts about readers’ tolerance for extended reading on
          screen. Reading from screens tends to slow people down and fatigue them, in part be-
          cause the contrast of print on page is much better than that of text on screen. But
           when reading is viewed as a sub-task within a larger task environment, the issue of fa-
           tigue is not so critical. Extended reading will continue to rely on print, while other
           functional sorts of reading will rely on screen-based text.
                Screen-based text differs from paper text in many ways, and not just because the
           two media are different. We use text on screens under different conditions and for dif-
           ferent purposes than we do paper texts, and it is these differences in use and purpose
           that will ultimately determine the key points of difference between the two media
           (Barton and Barton, “Simplicity”; Duchastel).
               A real virtue of paper text is its detachment from the physical world. We can
           read on planes or in the car; we can put books in our backpacks or leave them at
           home. We can pick up a book or magazine or a newspaper and read in every imagin-
           able situation, no matter what else is going on about us. In fact, reading allows us to
           escape the immediate situation, to enter other worlds.
                In comparison with paper text, screen-based text tends to be more tightly embed-
           ded in the context of situation; it is more likely to be bound up as a part of ongoing
           activities. Reading screen-based text is often integrated with other forms of action—
           learning to use software, constructing texts from separate files, or searching a data-
           base. A reader might search for relevant text, retrieve information in the form of pro-
           cedures or syntax, and then return to the task environment.          In such situations,
           reading becomes a second-level activity, resorted to when the higher-level task activ-
           ity hits a snag.
                This kind of task-oriented reading stands in contrast to, say, reading imaginative
           literature or magazines, where readers enter a world of text that impinges little on
           their real-time situation. Readers of screen-based text are not so much readers as doers
           or seekers: they read to find out how to do something or to retrieve some bit of infor-
           mation. People tend to read screen-based text to play games or to program; they read-
           to-write, or read-to-operate, or read-to-look-up. We don’t really have language for
           this kind of reading—it’s more like using text than reading it. Such reading-to-do is
           more like making raids on print than having extended engagements with a writer’s
           ideas or arguments. It is driven by the pragmatic situation; it is exploitative; it is ma-
           nipulative (see both Sticht and Redish).
               The shape of screen-based texts is influenced heavily by one specific develop-
           ment: help systems—those word files that attempt to rescue computer users who en-
           counter difficulties. Nobody reads this kind of text in anything like linear order, but
           many users make incursions on it as they struggle to work with their machines, read-
           ing bits and pieces as needed. The help text is simply part of the machine.
                     Bernhardt    =   The Shape of Text to Come:      The Texture of Print on Screens   235


     But reading that is situationally integrated with other activities is typical not just
of help systems for using computers. The electronic writing classrooms of Project
Jefferson at the University of Southern California (Chignell and Lacy; Lynch) or
Project   Athena’s   Educational       Online   System     at MIT     (Barrett,   “Introduction,”
Society) exist to support not so much reading activities as writing activities: research-
ing, keeping track of information, drafting and revising text, sharing text through
collaboration, or sharing texts and notes with others in the class. Pieces of text get
used, copied, borrowed, annotated, clipped, revised, and passed around in the interest
of some governing activity—in this case, the improvement of writing. Text is read
throughout the process, but reading is not the primary or ultimate goal. The com-
puter structures an environment, where the writer, a set of texts, and a group of peo-
ple interact in desirable ways. The screen-based text is interwoven with the larger ac-
tivity of producing work in a group setting. Text is inseparable from the situation.
     Such applications of technology take reading and writing beyond simple interac-
tion with the computer; the computer scaffolds social interaction within an elec-
tronic environment. In his Introduction to The Society of Text, Barrett describes the
use of computers to structure interaction (as opposed to modeling cognition) in
MIT’s Athena-supported network:

    [T]he internal workings of the mind were not mapped to the machine; instead, we con-
    ceived of the classroom as a “mechanism” for interaction and collaboration and mapped
    those social processes to the computer. In essence, we textualized the computer: we made
    it enter, and used it to support, the historical, social processes that we felt defined the pro-
    duction of texts in any instructional or conferencing environment. (xv)

In such situations of use, text is embedded within systems—it is not separate like a
book or a magazine. Its texture is shaped by both the machine and the instrumental
purposes and social interactions to which the text is put. Screen-based text becomes
part of a physical system that governs where it can be used, who can access it, what is
needed to access it, and so on. Text is inseparable from the machine.
     Notice how different this tends to make screen-based text from paper text. While
books are self-contained, portable, and usable within almost any situation, screen-
based text becomes dependent on a larger technological and social environment, to
be used under delimited circumstances, typically as an integral part of other ongoing
events. This is an important contrast in the pragmatics of paper vs. screen, under-
scored by the contrast of text-intensive books vs. situationally embedded screen-based
language.


INTERACTIVE TEXT
It is commonplace to characterize the reader’s role in a text as being active or transac-
tive, construction or constitutive. In this view, readers construct or reconstruct a text
in their own image, bringing as much to a text as they take from it. When we talk in
these ways, we often have in mind private encounters with text in physically inactive
settings. We are talking primarily about mental processes, or language processes, or
sometimes social processes, but not necessarily physical processes.
236   Chapter 5 #® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               It is useful to view the reading of electronic text in similar terms, only more so, or
           at least, more variously so. Readers of on-screen text interact physically with the text.
          Through the mouse, the cursor, the touch screen, or voice activation, the text be-
          comes a dynamic object, capable of being physically manipulated and transformed.
          The presence of the text is heightened through the virtual reality of the screen world:
          readers become participants, control outcomes, and shape the text itself.
               Reading text on screen tends to be much a more behaviorally interactive process
          than reading text on paper (Duchastel). The parallel activities of reading and writing
          create the interaction. Screen readers are actively engaged with screen text, as they
           key in information, or capture texts from one file and move it somewhere else, or an-
           notate or add to existing information in a file. A similar interactivity is sometimes
           sought in books, as writers try to engage the reader in solving problems, considering
           scenarios, or attempting various learning activities while reading the text. However,
           writers of print material cannot force the interaction, they can only invite it; readers
           can play along or skim past the problem sets, brain teasers, or tutorial activities.
           Writers of on-screen texts can force interaction, making it necessary for the reader to
           do something physical in order to get to the next step.
                The contrast in interactivity distinguishes other genres as well. Consider printed
           novels and their screen counterparts: text-based “novels” or adventure games.
           Readers of novels are constrained by the linearity of the text. While there are funda-
           mental differences in how readers respond to a text, the book presents the same face
           to each reader, and the choices of approach are very limited. One might choose to
           read the ending first or to peek at various chapters, but these are fairly impoverished
           choices. A reader of a text-based electronic novel or adventure game, in contrast, has
           to make constant decisions about where to go, what to do, who to follow or question.
           In doing so, the reader is forced to construct not just a mental representation of the
           work, but a physical representation as well (the succession of screens), through con-
           crete manipulations of the text. Out of many possible physical constructions of the
           text, the reader creates one, a particular chronological and experiential ordering of
           the text, a reading that belongs to no other reader.
                J am not holding up increased interactivity as a goal of print and I am not sug-
           gesting that, for example, electronic novels are richer or more satisfying than print
           novels. Such is clearly not the case. However, we should not underestimate the de-
           veloping genre of electronic novel: writers are discovering new forms of literary tex-
           tuality and engaging in some very interesting experiments. (See, for example, the
           special issue of Writing on the Edge, with its accompanying hypernovellas on disk.) In
           these experiments, authors engage readers in new forms of interaction, encourage
           readers to take control over the text, and blur the lines separating author and reader.
           We need to be alert to interactivity as a deeply interwoven feature of electronic texts,
           one we are just beginning to exploit.


           FUNCTIONALLY MAPPED TEXT
           Text, whether on page or on screen, performs a function of some sort: informing, di-
           recting, questioning, or posing situations contrary to fact. Such functional variation
           is often expressed linguistically through the grammatical systems of mood (indicative,
                   Bernhardt   =   The Shape of Text to Come:   The Texture of Print on Screens   237


imperative, interrogative, subjunctive). Readers can also usually make some rhetori-
cal determination as to what a chunk of text is doing—whether it is making a gener-
alization, committing a vow, stating a fact, offering an example or definition, offering
metacommentary on the text itself, or some other text act. In many printed texts,
such functional variation ‘is mapped semantically—one interprets the functional
roles of various chunks of text by inferring purpose from the meaning of the words or
phrases. Often, semantic or rhetorical function shifts are mapped by cohesive devices,
phrases like “for example,” or “to consider my next point.” When text shifts from one
function to another, the rhetorical tension at the boundary tends to demand some
kind of signal, and the language is rich in such signal systems (Bernhardt, “Reader”).
     Both sorts of text—print and screen-based—also use visual cues of layout and
typography to signal functional shifts. The visual system maps function onto text, sig-
naling to the reader how the text is to be read and acted upon. Thus tutorial writers
(print or online) might use a numbered list of action steps, with explanations in-
dented below each action, or they might use a double-column playscript format, with
actions on the left and results or explanations on the right. Boldface or other typo-
graphical signals might highlight actions, while parentheses or italics might signal in-
cidental commentary. The visual structuring that functionally differentiates text is
reinforced by syntactic cues that highlight the action being performed—imperative
or declarative grammatical structures, sequence cues like next or enumeratives, and
explanatory phrases like “to complete the installation” or “pressing the return key en-
ters the value.”
     When language is on-screen, readers must be able to distinguish different func-
tions:
    ¢ Some language cues interaction with the system: how to manage files, execute
      commands, or control the display.
    @ Other language cues navigation: where one is, how to move around, or how to
      get help.
    * Still other language offers system messages, showing that errors have occurred
      or that the system is currently processing some command. Some language sim-
      ply reminds readers of the system status or default settings.
    e And some language is informative/ideational.
The tight interworking of text and action leads to frequent system requests for action
that the reader must interpret and respond to correctly (from the system’s point of
view). These functional discriminations are not unique to electronic text, but they
tend to be much more important to efficient reading, and they tend to demand highly
planned and carefully structured formatting decisions on the part of the writer.
    Not all areas of the screen are equal, and functional mapping tends to be richest
on the borders—in the peripheral areas a biologist would call ecotonic. There is al-
ways a rich diversity and abundance of life on the edges of systems. On screens, the
language is the richest, there is the most going on, there is the greatest range of things
to do around the edges, on the perimeters. It is on the edge that we recognize where
we are, what we can do, where we can go, or how we can get out.
     Increasingly, various programs are adapting consistent functional mapping of op-
tions. With pull-down menus, for example, available options often appear in a regular
238   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          or bolded black font, while program options that are not currently available are
          shown in a shadowy, gray font. A simple, efficient cue such as this can greatly help
          readers use the functional mapping of programs they have never seen before. As read-
          ers become increasingly sophisticated and as interfaces coalesce around predictable
          design strategies, readers will develop their skills to the point where they efficiently
          and correctly recognize text-as-information versus text-as-signal-that-something-
          can-be-done-with-it.
               Unlike paper texts, screens offer a dynamic medium for mapping text in highly
          functional ways. Relying largely on visual cuing, readers acquire knowledge of how to
          do things with words and images. The traditional cues of paper texts—margins, in-
          dents, paragraphs, page numbers—appear impoverished next to the rapidly expand-
          ing set of cues that facilitate functional writing and reading on screen.



          MODULAR TEXT
           Most texts reflect some modularity of structure: a text is composed of other texts.
           Books have chapters or individual articles; magazines have articles, sidebars, letters-
           to-the-editors, advertisements, tables of contents, and so on. Many forms of print are
           in some way or another compositions, pieces of text positioned with other pieces of
           text, and often the individual modules are very different in type or function. A news-
           paper, for example, with its large pages, allows many modules of several sorts to be
           composed on the same page, and readers can efficiently scan large amounts of infor-
           mation. And the direction in popular newspapers, such as USA Today, is toward
           modularization, with pages composed of short, self-contained, highly visual exposi-
           tion. An encyclopedia, too, is composed of many individual modules, each of which
           constitutes a text that can stand on its own.
                The movement of text from paper to computer screen encourages further modu-
           larization of text structure. The screen is a window on a text base—only so much can
           be seen at one time. Just as an 8 4" by 11" sheet of paper to some extent determines
           the shape of printed text (titles, headings, white space, line length, indentations), the
           size and shape of the screen constrains the shape of electronic text. The screen, or a
           window contained within the screen, becomes the structural unit of prose, with text
           composed in screen-size chunks, no matter what their subject or function. In such
           systems, texts is highly localized. Reader attention is arrested at the level of idea
           grouping—the single topic that is represented on a single screen.
               Because text is fragmented and localized, on-screen text has problems with local
           cohesion. Closely related ideas must frequently be separated by screen boundaries.
           Even lists of strictly parallel, coordinate information must often bridge screen divi-
           sions, and the break from one screen to the next presents a larger gap than that from
           one page to the next. Consider that in a book, even when chunks of information
           must be broken at page boundaries, there is a 50% chance that the boundary will be
           at facing pages. And print layout can be manipulated to keep related information on
           one page. The problem is more difficult with small screen dimensions and strictly
           modular text fragments. Each module must, to some extent, stand on its own, inter-
           pretable without close logical cohesion with other screens. The writer must assume
                             Bermhardt                     = The Shape of Text to Come:                                       The Texture of Print on Screens           239


that a reader can arrive at a given screen from practically anywhere, so there can be
no assumption that the reader has built up a model of the logical relations of the text
from processing pages in a linear order.
     It might be argued that since screen text can easily be scrolled, text need not be
fragmented into screen-size modules. While it is true that most windows allow
scrolling of text that is longer than a screen, scrolling is inherently unsatisfactory.
When text must be scrolled to be viewed, readers hesitate, not knowing whether to
scroll down or skip the text. And while the reader can quickly skim a stack of infor-
mation if each card is completely contained within the window, it is time-consuming
and ultimately wasteful to have to scroll to see if text should be read.
    Also, when text is not composed in screen-size bites, readers tend to lose their
places and become disoriented. An example of this occurs with the ERIC CD-ROM
indexes on Silver Platter.
     The Page Up and Page Down keys are used to move through lists of references, but
these commands take the reader across the boundaries of individual entries. Readers
(at least this reader) constantly lose track of whether entries have been read or not,
since top-of-screen is not also top-of-page. Information that identifies titles or authors
is frequently separated visually from other important text (such as abstracts or key-
words), and a given type of information (such as title or author) is never in the same
place on the screen. The whole system feels jumpy and erratic, and a general sense of
disorientation prevails. The problem is alleviated to some extent through the use of
Control-Page Down, which takes the browser to the top of each entry. But then text is
missed that does not fit on a screen. Thus, with document databases containing huge

        SilverPlatter             2.01                  ERIC        1982    -     September          1991                  F10=Commands                  F1=Help


          implementation,                 and    evaluation.                The       final        chapter     includes          a       summary     and
          recommendations.                  The       12    appendixes,               which        constitute        more     than         half     of     the
          report,       include           the    pre-       and     posttests,              personal        data     and    summative              reaction
          questionnaires,                 the    task       analysis,            a    skills        and   interests         questionnaire,
          project       PERT        and    Gantt       charts,         screen             design     prototypes,           and       a    user's     guide.
          Tables       and    figures           appear       throughout.                   Field     test    data     are     also         included.             (26
          references)             (GL)

                                                                                                                                                     19) o£       29.
          AN:   ED308829
          AU:   Morrison,            -Gary-R.:             And-Others
          TI:   Reconsidering               the       Research         on       CBI       Screen     Design.
          PY:   1989
          NT:   20 p.;        In:     Proceedings              of     Selected             Research       Papers      presented             at     the
          Annual      Meeting         of    the       Association               for       Educational        Communications                 and
          Technology          (Dallas,          TX,        February         1-5,          1989).      For    the     complete            proceedings,
          see   IR    013     865.
          PR:   EDRS     Price        -    MF01/PC0O1          Plus        Postage.
          AB:   Two    variables            that       designers            should          consider        when     developing

       es       a            i              ire Ea
        MENU:   Mark     Record                 Select       Search         Term             Options               Find          Print              Download

        Press   ENTER        to   Mark      records          for      PRINT          or    DOWNLOAD


        Figure 1. Screen from ERIC CD-ROM Silver Platter. Notice how the scrolling inter-
      . faces with reading, since top of screen is not top of module. The text also has a
        homogeneity problem, since the lack of typographic cues leads to a homogeneous
        visual surface and attendant reading difficulties.
        Screen from ERIC (Educational Resources Clearinghouse) CD-ROM Silver Platter. Boston:
       Silver Platter, 1986-91.
240   Chapter 5 ®   Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          numbers of entries that must be browsed quickly, avoiding:scrolling text modules is
          preferable.
               Modular text does have its advantages. One distinct advantage is that the same
          text base can serve multiple audiences and multiple purposes for reading (Walker).
          When texts are composed in screen size chunks, the same modular text fragments can
          be used to build different documents or different paths through a document. Novice
          and expert tracks, for example, can be structured out of the same set of information.
          Texts of various sorts can be compiled instead of written, constructed out of inter-
          changeable parts. Both the WordPerfect and the Microsoft Word manuals are exam-
          ples of highly modular writing, with topics arranged alphabetically under headings, so
          the manuals work simultaneously as alphabetically-organized tutorials and reference
          volumes. Each page has predictable information in predictable slots. Such a book can
          be written in any order, and modules can be revised as needed without much effect
          on the other modules. And a modular approach can work well in both paper and
          electronic media. (Although, of course, a printed manual needs careful adaptation to
          work well as an online manual.)
               Whatever we may wish for, modular text is definitely the shape of text to come.
          For many pragmatic uses of screen-based text (such as online help), highly localized,
          non-sequential, fragmented pieces of text work fine. Such modularization leads to
          tremendous economy—a single piece of text can be written once, but read and used
          many times, by various writers and readers, for various purposes. It is well suited to
          mass storage on CD-ROM disks and to search-and-retrieve operations using keywords
          or browsers.
               We might speculate on the effects of modularity. Will readers become less toler-
          ant of extended arguments and reasoning? Will all texts disintegrate into fragments—
          a chopped up hash of language—with texts of 75-words-or-less dominating the pre-
          sentation of information? Will we stop thinking of reading as an extended, engrossing
          transaction with a text and its author and think of reading, instead, as gleaning or
          grazing across a range of textbits? Yes and no. Some of us will continue to engage with
          extended, lengthy, integrated text for certain purposes under certain conditions. And
          all of us will be exposed to increasing quantities of textbits—bits that are skimmed
          and scanned, compiles and compositioned, presented through various text databases
          that help us organize and exploit the information explosion.



           HIERARCHICAL, LAYERED, EMBEDDED TEXT
           To a limited extent, printed text can achieve a special sort of modularization through
           layered or embedded effects. Within passages of text, semantic cues signal that infor-
           mation is peripheral, or supportive, or explanatory, or defining. Parentheses, foot-
           notes, asides, and facsimile or boxed text all allow writers to escape the immediately
           present text, to move down or across a level in the text hierarchy, to assign a different
           status to information, to put it next to or below the predominant text level. In longer
           printed texts, writers can assemble glossaries, indexes, information on authors, pref-
           aces, notes on the edition, or notes to specific groups of readers. These devices give
                    Bernhardt   =» The Shape of Text to Come:   The Texture of Print on Screens   241


print some texture of hierarchy, indicating that not all information is on the same
level. Readers can pursue the mainline text, but they can also read peripheral or sup-
porting information that has a status other than mainline. Texts digress.
     Books, however, are imperfectly suited to hierarchical or embedded text. They es-
sentially are a flat medium,meant to be read in linear fashion. Readers can escape lin-
earity; they can jump around or use different sections of a text in different ways. (For a
provocative presentation of ways that texts can escape two dimensions, see Tufte).
The programmed textbooks that reflected behavioristic models of learning, such as
Joseph C. Blumenthal’s English 2600, were one attempt to escape the linearity of print.
These books took learners on various tracks through the text. Short quizzes over mate-
tial would assess learner knowledge and then send the learner to appropriate pages for
explanation and practice. Advanced learners would speed along on the advanced
track. Such books were always a little odd. The habits of approaching text in linear
fashion were too ingrained on learners. As one worked through such texts, one won-
dered what was being skipped and whether learning was being accurately evaluated.
     Unlike books, computers are well suited to nonlinear text. Nonlinear text is, in
fact, probably the best definition of the kind of text generated by the rapidly expand-
ing technologies of hypertext. Hypertext programs allow texts of various sorts to be
combined into large text bases, allowing readers to move freely across various sorts of
information in nonlinear ways.
     Though two-dimensional, screens offer the compelling illusion of depth. In a
windowing environment, active files and various kinds of text can be displayed and
stacked up on the screen. Somewhere behind an active file, help can exist, to be
called with a simple command or click of the mouse. Glossaries can exist behind
words, levels of explanation and example can exist below the surface of the text. Text
can be put on clipboards or pushed out to the side of the work area. Information can
be present without being visible except through subtle reminders: a shaded term sug-
gesting a connection to another text, a dog-eared page icon pointing toward a per-
sonal annotation on a file, a pull-down bar offering access to other texts. The reader
can be in two (or more) places at once, with a definition popped up alongside an un-
known text or with a palette of shading patterns placed alongside a graphic. The
desktop can be stacked with open files—multiple applications running simultane-
ously—each with its own text in its own screen areas.
    Paper text must embed signals of hierarchy within the linear text itself or in some
remote location, such as a table of contents. But electronic text can actually be hier-
archically or loosely structured, and it can show its structure schematically or in full
detail.   A screen-based technical manual, for example, can have a cascading design,
with top-level screens offering statements of purpose, scope, and audience definition.
At a next level of detail, overviews of steps in a process can be offered. Each step can
be exploded to show detailed procedures, and behind the detailed procedures other
sorts of information can reside—troubleshooting advice, specifications, or code
(Herrstrom and Massey). Such hypertext features essentially allow text to escape lin-
earity—there need not be a Chapter One because there need not be a declared linear
order of information. Text can be loosely structured, built by association, linked in
networks or multidimensional matrices.
242   Chapter 5 #® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



                Linguists have long noted that syntax is deeply recursive. Sentences can contain
           sentences, clauses can contain multiple other clauses, and phrases can themselves
           contain clauses, so that, in effect, lower-level units within a hierarchy can contain
           higher-level ones. With electronic text, what is true at the syntactic level—the recur-
           sion that gives language extreme structural flexibility—is true at the discourse level.
           Like Chinese boxes, text can be nested within text, and huge texts can reside within
           tiny fragments. With the combination of both hierarchical subordination and lateral
           links from any point to any point, hypertext offers greatly expanded possibilities for
           new structures characterized by layering and flexibility.


           NAVIGABLE TEXT
           Readers of all text must navigate; they must find their ways through sometimes large
           or diffuse collections of information. And they have developed navigational strate-
           gies for print—using signposts such as tables of contents, indexes, headings, headers,
           pagination, and so on. Print readers can flip around in a text, scan very quickly, size
           up the whole, and generally learn from physical and directional cues where they are
           in the text and where information they need is likely to be.
                Imagine your own strategies for reading a newspaper: how it is you decide what to
           read and how much of it, how your eyes work the page, how quickly and efficiently
           you take in information. There are highly developed skills operating here, and it
           shouldn’t be too surprising that the early forms of teletext news, presented as a simple
           scrolling panel of information, did not enjoy much acceptance since they did not al-
           low readers to exercise existing, efficient strategies for using print. People do not want
           to read extended text on screen, especially when the machine controls the content
           and the pace. Readers want control.
                Books are highly evolved forms: what they do, they do well. A reader can come
           to a book with highly evolved strategies for getting information from print, but users
           of computer systems are often handicapped by not having useful, productive strate-
           gies for approaching computer-based text. They are often frustrated when they apply
           learned strategies from print or from other software, only to find that one system
           doesn’t work the same way another one does. Because the screen lacks the total phys-
           ical presence of a printed text, screen readers have difficulty sizing up the whole, get-
           ting a full sense of how much information is present and how much has been viewed.
           One knows immediately where one is in a book, but it is often difficult to maintain
           the same intelligence in screen-based text. And so readers of on-screen text have a
           difficult time navigating. They must read through a window onto a text, and that
           window limits what the reader sees at any one time. The window is a flat, two-dimen-
           sional space, and it is notoriously difficult to know exactly where one is, where one
           has been, or where one is going. And when an on-screen text is complicated by mul-
           tiple windows and multiple active files, levels of embedded texts, or a hypermedia en-
           vironment, navigation poses significant threats to coherence.
               A critical threat to the usefulness of on-screen text is the homogeneity problem
           (Nielsen 299). Text on a computer screen tends to be uniform; because of consistent
           display fonts, spacing, margins, color, design, and size of text modules, it all starts to
                   Bernhardt   =   The Shape of Text to Come:   The Texture of Print on Screens   243


look the same. Contrast a book with a newspaper or a shopping list to get a sense of
the variation in surface that print presents and it becomes clear why on-screen read-
ers are frequently lost in textual space. The challenge of designing text on screens
rests in large part on overcoming the machine’s tendency toward a homogeneous
surface.                     ;
     Many initial attempts to provide navigation aids for screen-based text are analog-
ically borrowed from paper text. Menus are something like tables of contents, except
that when one makes a decision about where to go for information, the page turning
is automatic. Indexes look similar in both media and work equally well if designed
well. Still borrowing on paper cues, screen headers and footers—as well as titles on
menus, pop-up windows, or text modules—can tell readers of screen text where they
are, much as one can tell in many books what chapter or what article one is reading
by looking to a title or a page header. Screens can be paginated (borrowing even the
term page for screen), often in the form Page 3 of 6, but also iconically as in
PageMaker documents, with sets of tiny, numbered pages on the lower left of the
screen that can be clicked on to move through the document. Readers need a sense of
how much they have viewed and what is left in the set of related screens they are
scanning.
    While some navigation aids are borrowed from print, other navigation options
work best only within electronic media. Graphical browsers (looking like cluster dia-
grams) can offer readers a visualization of the structure of information, so that one
can see at a glance the scope and nature of large collections of information. The in-
formation contained in a large text base is mapped onto a network representation—
with key terms constituting nodes and lines showing relationships among the nodes.
Each node represents a group of related information. Like electronic menus and in-
dexes, such browsers offer more than a cue to structure; they facilitate interaction
with the text base. Readers can point and click their way from one node to another,
explode a node to explore sub-nodes, and so build mental models of the structure of
information in interactive, highly intuitive ways. Books might provide similar
browsers, such as timelines or the Encyclopedia Britannica’s Topicon, but these devices
simply do not have the fluid or interactive qualities of electronic browsers.
    Ties, or links, or buttons—hot spots in the text that link one screen or term with
other screens or terms in the text base—work much better in screen-based text than
in paper texts. Some books achieve a limited level of such linking through, for exam-
ple, endnotes or references to appendices, but the general mechanism is much better
suited to electronic text. (Students of mine have read and used Joseph Williams's
Style for months without recognizing that boldfaced terms are defined in the glossary.)
The links in screen-based text announce themselves by their typography or visual
character; clicking on a link takes one immediately to some related text. The links
can be visually distinguished by function—links from an index to relevant text, from
a term to a glossary definition, from a menu to a chosen activity, from an overview to
more detailed information, and so on. Links serve as anchors to a given screen; one is
anchored to the screen icon while going off for an exploratory cruise. For navigating
large text bases, the single device of links with anchors in a present screen provides a
powerful control over text that cannot be approached within paper texts.
244   Chapter 5 = Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               Standard navigation devices are quickly emerging, so’ that screen readers can
          bring learned strategies to new interfaces and new texts. In many programs, the
          perimeter of the screen is defined as a wayfinding area, containing cues about where
          one currently is (as in the title on the screen) and about where one can currently go
          (as represented primarily in the choices of active icons). Having worked with a few
          programs that use similar devices, readers come to expect the icons to be active—to
          respond to a point-and-click. They realize, too, that cues will generally allow them to
          determine where they are and where they can go. They relate to the home menu—
          the familiar, top-level screen that offers a breakdown of wayfinding options at the
          broadest level. Such screens constitute landmarks to the navigator—familiar, easily
          recognizable locations. Readers come to expect to be able to do certain things, and
          well-designed systems use the navigational knowledge readers have naturally ac-
          quired through interaction with other programs, just as book designers offer readers
          an index, or a page number, or a chapter title.


           SPACIOUS TEXT
           Print is constrained by sheer physical bulk. Consider the constraint of bulk on the
           compact Oxford English Dictionary, with its print compressed to the point of practi-
           cal illegibility to the naked eye, crammed onto pages full of abbreviations and omit-
           ted information. Or consider the sheer bulk of paper documentation necessary to
           run a complex piece of machinery—an aircraft carrier or an airplane. The sheer
           weight of paper makes a strong argument for online information. The tons of paper
           documentation that burn the precious fuel supply of a submarine have a negligible
           weight in electronic form. The same physicality that makes books easy to use—
           portable, handy, laptop—makes them impossible to use as systems grow larger and
           more complex, and as the need for documentation increases proportionately (or geo-
           metrically).
                No similar physical constraint shapes electronic text. The result is a spaciousness
           in both the amount of information that can be recorded and in the design of informa-
           tion display. Steven Jobs can include the Oxford English Dictionary and Shakespeare’s
           plays in the NEXT computer’s memory—no problem. The price of memory has been
           decreasing quickly while new technologies increase storage limits. Large stacks of in-
           formation can be duplicated for the price of a disk; huge quantities of information can
           reside on a single compact disk. A CD-ROM disk might hold 550,000 pages of text
           with 1,000 characters per page. But it weighs only ounces, fits into your pocket, and
           will soon be replaced by more compact storage media.
                Writers of paper text are always contained by length (as | am here!): writing is a
           process of selection, cutting, paring away at what is non-essential or redundant. Paper
           text forces absurdities upon writers—squeezing text into narrow margins and using
           smaller fonts to keep the overall page count within limits. But screens introduce the
           luxury of open space. There is no demand to run unrelated text together in the inter-
           est of saving page space. If a writer hasn’t much to say about something, space can be
           left blank without worrying about cost. The effect on prose is liberating, freeing it
           from the economic constraints of inscription.
                      Bernhardt    = The Shape of Text to Come:   The Texture of Print on Screens   245


GRAPHICALLY RICH TEXT
Print is a graphic medium; it displays its meanings in the spread of ink on page
(Bernhardt, “Seeing the Text”). Writers of printed text have many options at their
disposal to make texts visually informative: white space, font sizes, line spacing,
icons, non-alphabetic characters like bullets and daggers, margins, and the whole
range of pictorial displays—graphs, charts, drawings, etc. The use of computers for
word processing has heightened our awareness of the graphic component of meaning.
Both student writers and experts have at their command a wide range of graphic tools
and an expanding base of research and aesthetic insight to guide the design of text on
page (see Barton and Barton, “Trends”). Wholly new products—desktop publishing
and graphics software—give authorial control over text/graphic integration. More
than ever before, writers are page designers; they are composition specialists.
     Electronic text extends visual composition by offering a surface with more
graphic potential and greatly augmented options for text/graphic display and integra-
tion. Some of these display options are shared by print and screen-based text. White
space (though often not white), space breaks, and margins actively signal divisions
within a text, showing what goes with what and where the boundaries are. Bullets
and numbered lists cue sequences of information. Font sizes and varieties, headings,
color, boldface and italics show hierarchies within a text, cuing subordinate and su-
perordinate relations. Headings, text shape, and callouts in the margins can provide
filters for readers, tracking them toward or through various information paths so that
each reader is guided to appropriate text for the task at hand.
      But screen-based text goes beyond print in its visual effects. Readers can zoom in
and out on screen text, editing graphics at the pixel level or looking at facing pages in
page-preview mode, with Greeked text downplaying verbal meanings in favor of a vi-
sual gestalt that allows writers to evaluate design. Sequences can be animated, proce-
dures can be demonstrated. Text can flash or take on spot color or be outlined or pre-
sented   in inverse    video.     With   CD-ROM    integration,   video,   voice,   or musical
sequences can be part of a text, achieving effects that print can only struggle to sug-
gest. Exploded diagrams, so important to technical writing, can actually explode, and
readers can view technical illustrations at varying levels of detail, with high resolu-
tion on close-up shots of delicate mechanisms (Jong). Readers can travel in virtual
space, examining an object such as a building or an automobile from various perspec-
tives, moving around the object in three-dimensional CAD space.
      Screen-based text takes information in iconic, visually metaphoric directions.
We know people learn about complicated systems best when they have organizing
metaphors. Electronic information allows us to exploit metaphors, so that the screen
is a window onto a desktop and information is kept in files. We use control panels,
complete with gauges, switches, bells, and alarm clocks. We relate easily to the icons of
control, throwing text into the garbage can or moving icons for pages (representing
files) from one location to another.
      Of course, the phosphor glow of screen text causes its share of problems. We are
subjected to flicker, glare, and electronic interference. The screen image suffers, and
so we do, from non-optimal light conditions. Our eyes complain of fatigue from at-
246   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          tempting to maintain focus on a curved screen. We are hampered by screen size and
          resolution. But that same phosphor offers a fluid, dynamic medium, with many more
          options than print has for displaying information and exploiting visual intelligence.



           CUSTOMIZABLE, PUBLISHABLE TEXT
          Little can be done by the reader of paper text to customize the text itself. The few
          customizing devices are well exploited: turning down the corner of a page or leaving a
          bookmark or a self-stick note, writing notes in the margin, or highlighting and under-
          lining passages. Such modest adaptations of the static text to the uses of an individual
          reader make the book more valuable to the owner but less valuable to other readers.
               Electronic text, in contrast, benefits from being infinitely more fluid, expansive,
           and adaptable to individual uses. Readers can annotate without the boundaries of
           hard copy. Text on screens can be changed—that is one of its essential properties.
           Lines can be written between the lines, notes can be appended to the text itself or as
           pop-up annotations behind the screen.
                 The display of the text itself can be customized. Readers can reduce screen clut-
           ter by suppressing the display of rulers, spaces, returns, mark-up language, stylebars,
           borders, and menus. Or readers can show properties of screen text—with every space
           and return signaled in a fashion that has no print equivalent. Readers can decide the
           level of on-screen prompting they want, with menus and help cues displayed or sup-
           pressed. Background colors, screen borders, audio messaging, cursor speed—any num-
           ber of features of the display can be set to individual parameters. Individual user pro-
           files can be stored that automatically adjust the parameters based on predetermined
           settings. This means the “same” text can display itself differently, depending on the
           preferences of individual readers.
                 Screen-based text has the potential to adapt to individual users automatically by
           keeping histories on users and responding in intelligent ways to likely scenarios based
           on what a particular user has done in the past. Individualized glossaries, dictionaries,
           macros, indexes, authoring levels, search procedures, bookmarks, and stylesheets all
           give the readers of screen-based text real ownership of their texts. Readers own the
           text because they can do what they want with it; they can make it their own, unlike
           any other reader’s texts.
                The controls over fluid, customizable text are shared by the system designer and
           the user. Systems can be made sensitive to user context, providing help based on best
           guesses about where the user is in the program and what sort of help might be needed.
           Shortcuts that allow individual control can be built into the system. For example,
           many programs offer novice and expert paths, with menus and on-screen prompts for
           new users. Such prompting speeds learning for new users. But power users want
           menus and cues suppressed—they know what they need to do and want to do it in
           the fewest number of keystrokes. Good design allows both types of user to coexist.
                The control over the shape of texts that microcomputers grant users leads in-
           evitably toward not just customizable but publishable text. Just as the printing press
           eventually puts books into everyone’s hands, desktop publishing systems put the
                       Bernhardt   =» The Shape of Text to Come:   The Texture of Print on Screens   247


printing press into everyone’s hands. Anyone can now design, display, and print work
that is potentially indistinguishable from professionally printed work.
     Traditionally, much of the cost of print has been in the production stage—the
human and machine costs of typesetting, paper, binding, and distribution. Longer
length or fancier graphics meant higher prices. The high production cost per unit for
books and magazines made copies fairly expensive, but highly portable and accessible
to anyone who could read. With screen-based text, however, much of the cost of pro-
duction is shifted from the printer to the author and the audience. It is cheap and
easy to duplicate disks. And disks (whether floppy or hard) hold immense quantities
of information in a small format, so issues of length are no longer so important to
overall cost. A disk can hold graphics and animated sequences, color diagrams and
fancy fontography, interactive tutorials and reference materials. Once the informa-
tion is coded to the disk, reproduction is a simple, inexpensive matter.
      But the more complicated the on-screen text, the higher the overhead demands
on authors and readers. Instead of printers needing high-priced equipment and ex-
pensive materials to produce fancy texts, writers need high-priced equipment to au-
thor texts, and readers now need high-priced equipment to run the disk. And
whereas there never were compatibility problems between readers and books, there
are now multiple and vexing problems of matching hardware and software.
      Once printed, paper text is fairly static. It presents the same face to all readers, so
that my copy of a book looks just like yours. In contrast to the static quality of paper
text, on-screen text is fluid and customizable, updatable and expandable. These qual-
ities lead to multiple versions, to individually adapted texts, and give an elasticity to
electronic text that changes the nature of publication. And with the advent of desk-
top publishing, the movement from screen-based text to paper is eased, so even print
loses its static quality. A writer can produce papers or books in multiple versions, eas-
ily redesigned and updated. Print is no longer permanent, because the cost and effort
of updating editions is negligible. The fluidity of the screen has begun to overcome
the static inertia of print.


THE SHAPE OF TEXTS TO COME
The shape of text changes as it moves from paper to screen. On-screen text is emi-
nently interactive, closely embedded in ongoing action in real-time settings. It bor-
rows heavily on the evolved strategies readers possess for interacting with printed
texts, but provides a more fluid, changeable medium, so that the text itself becomes
an object for manipulation and change.
     As texts change, we will develop new strategies for reading and writing. Text
bases will grow, becoming huge compilations of information stored on disk with no
corresponding printed versions. It will feel natural to move through large pools of in-
formation, and we will rely on learned strategies for knowing where we are, where we
want to go, and what we want to do when we get there. We will develop new sorts of
reading skills, ones based around text that is modular, layered, hierarchical, and
loosely associative. We will demand control over text—over its display, its structure,
and its publication.
248   Chapter 5 = Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               We are now at a point of transition of the sort described by Ong, similar to tran-
          sitions from orality to literacy or from handwritten manuscripts to printed. The com-
          puter is becoming increasingly dominant as a primary medium for presenting and
          working with texts. As we take control of computer-based texts, the existing lines be-
          tween reading and writing will tend to blur into a single notion of use (Slatin). Texts
          will have multiple authors and grow incrementally as readers individualize and struc-
          ture text for their own uses. The presence of screens will become increasingly com-
          mon, a part of our daily lives, close at h and in a variety of situations.
               As with the interrelation of spoken and written media, so between paper and
          screen-based text: we will see crossbreeding, with the uses and forms of one medium
          shaping the uses and forms of the other, so that as the predominance of and our fa-
          miliarity with screen-based text increases, the dimensions of variation discussed here
          will have a greater and greater shaping influence on paper text. But the real potential
          for full exploitation of these dimensions of variation lies in text on screens. It is the
          dynamic, fluid, graphic nature of computer-based texts that will allow full play of
          these variables in shaping the texture of print on screens.
           Works Cited
               Barton, Ben FE, and Marthalee S. Barton. “Simplicity in Visual Representation: A
                 Semiotic Approach.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 1 (1987):
                 9-26.
               —. “Trends in Visual Representation.”        Technical and Business Communication:
                                                         ”



                 Bibliography Essays for Teachers and Corporate Trainers. Ed. Charles Sides. Urbana:
                 NCTE, 1989. 95-135.
               Barrett, Edward, ed. The Society of Text: Hypertext,     Hypermedia,   and the Social
                  Construction of Knowledge. Cambridge: MIT P, 1989.
               Bernhardt, Stephen A. “The Reader, the Writer, and the Scientific Text.” Journal of
                  Technical Writing and Communication 15.2 (1985): 163-74.
               —. “Seeing the Text.” College Composition and Communication 37 (Feb. 1986): 66-78.
               Bolter, Jay David. Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the History of Writing.
                   Hillsdale: Erlbaum, 1991.
               Brockmann, R. John. Writing Better Computer User Documentation: From Paper to
                  Hypertext. Version 2. New York: Wiley, 1990.
               Chignell, Marc H., and Richard M. Lacy. “Project Jefferson: Integrating Research and
                  Instruction.” Academic Computing 3 (Oct. 1988): 12-17, 40-45.
               Duchastel, Philippe C. “Display and Interaction Features of Instructional Texts and
                  Computers.” British Journal of Educational Technology 19.1 (1988): 58-65.
               Harward, V. Judson. “From Museum to Monitor: The Visual Exploration of the
                  Ancient World.” Academic Computing 2 (May/June 1988): 16-19, 69-71.
               Herrstrom, David S., and David G. Massey. “Hypertext in Context.” Barrett 45—58.
               Horton, William. Designing and Writing Online Documentation: Help Files to Hypertext.
                  New York: Wiley, 1990.
               Jong, Steven. “The Challenge of Hypertext.” Proceedings of the 35th International
                  Technical Communication Conference. Washington: Society for Technical
                  Communication,    1988. 30-32.
               Kostelnick, Charles. “Visual Rhetoric:   A Reader-Oriented Approach to Graphics and
                  design.” Technical Writing Teacher 16 (Winter 1989): 77-88.
                   Bernhardt    = The Shape of Text to Come:       The Texture of Print on Screens   249


   Lynch, Anne. “Project Jefferson and the Development of Research Skills.” Reference
      Services Review (Fall 1989): 91-96.
   Merrill, Paul F “Displaying Text on Microcomputers.” The Technology of Text. Ed.
       David Jonassen. Vol. 2. Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology Publications,
       1982. 401-13.       ;
   Nielsen, Jakob. “The Art of Navigating through Hypertext.” Communications of the
      ACM 33 (March 1990): 296-310.
   Ong, Walter J. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: Methuen,
      1982.
   Redish, Janice. “Writing in Organizations.” Writing in the Business Professions. Ed.
      Myra Kogen. Urbana: NCTE, 1989. 97-124.
   Rubens, Philip M. “Online Information, Hypermedia, and the Idea of Literacy.”
      Barrett 3-20.
   —. “A Reader’s View of Text and Graphics: Implications for Transactional Text.”
      Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 16.1/2 (1986): 73-86.
   Rubens, Philip M., and Robert Krull. “Application of Research on Document Design
       to Online Displays.” Technical Communication (4th Quarter 1985): 29-34.
   Slatin, John M. “Reading Hypertext: Order and Coherence in a New Medium.”
       College English 52 (Dec. 1990): 870-83.
   Stricht, Thomas. “Understanding Readers and Their Uses of Text.” Designing Usable
      Texts. Ed. Thomas M. Duffy and Robert M. Waller. Orlando: Academic Press,
       1985. 315-40.
   Tufte, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, 1990.
   Visible Language. Special issue on adaptation to new display technologies. 18.1
       (Winter 1984).
   Walker, Janet H. “Authoring Tools for Complex Document Sets.” Barrett 132-47.
   Writing on the Edge. Special issue on hypertext. 2.2 (Spring 1991).

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 1. Summarize the differences between linear and nonlinear texts, illustrating your summary
   with concrete examples.
 2. Explain how an increased demand for situationally embedded text might affect readers’
    expectations, and also the work of professional writers.
 3. Bernhardt clearly explains how computers change the ways we interact with texts.
    Summarize these effects. Then, shift focus: instead of focusing on how people interact
    with texts, explore how electronic texts affect the ways people interact with one another,
    individually and/or in groups.
 4. Discussions about the effects of computer technologies on writing can quickly become
    outdated, and Bernhardt’s 1993 article (probably written in 1991 or 1992) is no excep-
    tion. Assess where Bernhardt’s arguments about the differences between print and on-
    screen texts might now be outdated by advances in either on-screen or print technolo-
    gies. Then, assess what such rapidity of change suggests for writers in the workplace.
250   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action


           OHROSPEHEHSMHORFSHOHERERYOHROSSHHHEHHH
                         AHHH ERE HEHE SE ROACH VERE RT EHAHROMSHEHHLHEHSEHRFTHOHEHHHOGTSOEHHEH ODE


                 FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
                 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
                 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
                 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
                 in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
                 the field itself.
                 1. limners
                 2. Stationers’ Company
                 3. fair use
                 4. public domain
                 5. site license

           EOS    OSHOHEHSERESOSAFEHO   SHOT HERO   AREER TESEREHRTROGARHTTEHREHHOTOHSSHHRFETHSHAERHHIOHIHTHEDERSEF
                                                                                                           RO ERHHEBEAD



                 WuHo “Owns” ELECTRONIC                                               TEXTS?
           SOGHRHSERERTEOERFT       EGER   OHO   HLOHEHRRHOHRICHHAHEHTSAOSHSEHHFHRHATERHHTETERTHHHHHRHTRESFPEHRTHEOAHEHEREGE



                 THARON W. HOWARD
                 Clemson University


           N“ information technologies make it increasingly difficult for authors and corpo-
                rations to claim that ideas and information are property which can be sold. To
           understand the problems of authorship in electronic environments, this chapter ex-
           amines the historical development of U.S. copyright and three historically distinct
           theories of ownership upon which it is based. The author ultimately argues that a re-
           vised social constructionist perspective best addresses the challenges of ownership
           created by new technologies.

                     The Congress shall have the power ...to Promote the Progress of Science
                     and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the
                     exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.
                                                                               —U.S. Constitution, Art. 1, Sec. 8


                     Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106, the fair use of a copyrighted
                     work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any
                     other means specified in that section, for purposes such as criticism, com-
                     ment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use),
                     scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.
                                                                         —17 U.S. Code, Sec. 107

                For most people, including a large number of practicing professional writers and
           professional writing teachers, the issue of intellectual property isn’t something they
           usually consider particularly problematic. Most writers today, particularly those of us

           Source: Howard, Tharon W. “Who ‘Owns’ Electronic Texts?” Electronic Literacies in the Workplace:   Technologies of Writing.
           1996, pp. 177-198.      Copyright 1996 by the National Council of Teachers of English. Reprinted with permission.
                                                         Howard     ® Who    “Owns”    Electronic Texts?   251


who spent a lot of our academic careers in and around English departments, tend to
subscribe to the view that authors “own” their texts. We tend to believe (as is implied
by the excerpt from the Constitution, above) that we have the right to expect remu-
neration for “our” writing, and furthermore, that we ought to be able to have some
control over how our texts will be used.
     However, recent trends toward more collaborative writing projects in the work-
place, along with the use of online computer conferences, electronic discussion
groups, hypertexts, multimedia presentations, groupware, and other computer tech-
nologies aimed at enhancing and promoting collaboration, are all seriously challeng-
ing the popular, romantic view that an author owns his or her text. More and more
frequently, professional writers are finding themselves confronted with intellectual
property and copyright issues which result from the increased reliance on computers
in the workplace, and, in many cases, writers are finding themselves unprepared to
deal with these issues. Consider, for example, the following scenarios:
    Scenario 1
        You work in the document design department of a large corporation, and, traditionally,
    your department has made it a point of pride to produce dramatic covers for the com-
    pany’s annual report. One of your co-workers finds a reproduction of a famous photograph
    in a popular magazine, and the image would be perfect for the theme of this year’s annual
    report with some cutting, pasting, and a few other modifications.
        Since the photograph is famous, since you're going to use only part of the image, and
    since you're going to modify the image in order to produce something which is essentially
    a new image, should you go ahead and scan it? Or do you first have to have permission
    from the magazine which first reproduced it, the publishing house which sells reproduc-
    tions of it, or the photographer who originally took the photograph?
    Scenario 2
        You’ve just been hired to do some desktop-publishing work for a large consulting firm.
    The office manager bought you a new computer system to use, but the system came with a
    new software package that is incompatible with the old version of the software used by
    the rest of the office. As a result, you can’t share files with co-workers and do your job ef-
    fectively. Fortunately, however, the office still has the installation disks for the old version
    of the software, and the office manager tells you that, since these disks were purchased by
    the company, you can install the old software on your system.
        Should you go ahead and copy the software since the office has already paid for it?
    Scenario 3
       You’re doing research on an article about usability testing for Technical Communication,
    and, as part of your research, you join an electronic discussion group on the Internet,
    where people doing human-factors research exchange e-mail messages about their works-
    in-progress. As you’re writing your article, someone posts an e-mail message to the group
   describing the results of her unpublished research project. These results are central to
   your article’s thesis and force you to completely revise your thinking about the subject.
   Since these results haven’t been published elsewhere, you wish to quote from the e-mail
   message in your article.
       Can you legally and ethically quote from an e-mail message? Indeed, are you oblig-
   ated to cite the message since it has had such a profound impact on your own thinking?
   If so, does anyone own the copyright on the message? Do you need to seek the author’s
   permission? Or, since the message was electronically “published” by an electronic discus-
   sion group, do you need to have the permission of the person(s) who created and operate
252   Chapter 5    #® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               the discussion group or the university or company which owns the computer that hosts
               the group?
               Scenario 4
                  You work for a large corporation in which e-mail is the primary means of communica-
               tion. Instead of using informal notes, memos, short reports, or phone conversations to
              contact each other, people in your company use e-mail. In keeping with this “paperless of-
              fice” milieu, you have maintained an electronic correspondence with a co-worker in an-
              other department for some time. You and your co-worker (who happens to be of the op-
              posite sex) are careful to keep your electronic interaction limited to your breaks and
              lunch periods so that it does not interfere with your work. Your supervisor knows what
              you're doing and has said that she actually prefers that you correspond via e-mail on your
              breaks since that way, you’re not tying up the office telephone. However, one afternoon,
              you discover that your electronic exchanges are being monitored and even shared as jokes
              among people in the computer operations department. You’re furious at this violation of
              your right to control how your texts will be used, but your supervisor tells you that the
              company owns the computer and, therefore, has the right to monitor its use.
                  Can you stop this monitoring of your e-mail? Who actually “owns” the messages
              you've been sending? Do you, as the author, own the messages? Does the addressee who
              received them? Or does the owner of the system on which the messages were produced?
              Furthermore, what rights does ownership of the messages entail?
               Scenario 5
                   You're a faculty member in a professional writing program at a large university, and one
               of your responsibilities is to serve as the placement director for the program. In order to
               help your graduates find information about companies which routinely hire writers, you
               decide to create a Hypercard stack which will allow students to click on a map of the
               United States. Then, depending on the state students select, students would receive in-
               formation about specific companies located in that state. You construct your stacks on the
               university's computers, and from a book which provides an alphabetical list of national
               corporations, you select data on companies which you think might routinely hire techni-
               cal writers. The resulting hypertext is so popular among your students that several pub-
               lishers learn of it and are interested in publishing it.
                   Can you publish your hypertext? Have you infringed on any copyrights by providing
               your students with your hypertext in the first place? If you can publish your text, are you
               legally obligated to pay any royalties to your university or to the publisher or author of the
               book from which you selected your data?

                  As these scenarios illustrate, the new electronic environment          in which profes-
           sional writers must now function makes intellectual property and copyright issues
           more and more a part of their everyday experience in the workplace. Indeed, these
           sorts of issues are becoming so commonplace that we may well wish to make an un-
           derstanding of intellectual property in an electronic environment a criterion of “elec-
           tronic” or “computer literacy.” As | will show when we return to these scenarios at
           the end of this essay, even a relatively clear understanding of the principles of copy-
           right law may not allow writers to answer the questions posed in these scenarios.
                However, not only do professional writers need to have a better understanding of
           copyright issues because they are more likely to encounter them than ever before, but
           they also need to better understand questions about intellectual property in an elec-
           tronic environment because new information technologies are forcing us to reshape
           traditional notions about authorship and ownership. In a world where, for example, a
                                                    Howard   #® Who   “Owns”   Electronic Texts?   253


software package can reorganize and rewrite the information in databases (thereby
“virtually” creating or authoring texts without human intervention), colloquial ideas
about authorship and ownership may no longer be enough. In fact, these sorts of
technological challenges to traditional ideas of ownership are particularly trouble-
some to writers in the workplace because (a) they may diminish writers’ claims to re-
muneration for their work, and (b) they may strip writers of the right to control how
their texts will be used.
     In order to better understand the problems of ownership in the electronic work-
place, I will offer a brief historical examination of the origins of U.S. copyright law
since it is through copyright laws that the rights of individual authors and corpora-
tions have come to be defined. Furthermore, by examining the evolution of current
copyright law, I will explore why electronic publishing, electronic discussion groups,
computer conferences, and other new information technologies represent such a
challenge to current copyright law. A historical examination of another new publish-
ing technology, i.e., the printing press, will show that then, as now, the introduction
of new technologies challenged existing systems for owning and controlling texts.
Furthermore, this examination will show that, although many people are not aware
of it, current copyright law reflects an interesting struggle among at least three histor-
ically distinct and competing theories of textual ownership. First, there is, of course,
the romantic and commonplace notion that authors have a “natural right” to the
fruits of their intellectual labors. Second, there is the assertion that the public has a
right to all knowledge since “Laws of Nature” and absolute truths cannot be the prop-
erty of any one individual. And third, there is the view that all knowledge is socially
constructed, that a text is a product of the community the writer inhabits, and that
the text must therefore be communal, rather than individual, property. These three
theories have tended to compete when the question has been whether a copyright is
a natural right of private property or whether a copyright is a privilege granted to in-
dividuals by the public’s representatives.


A HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
When I’ve taught my professional writing students about the history of copyright
laws, and even when I’ve discussed the subject among some of my faculty colleagues,
one of the things that always seems to surprise them is the fact that the original impe-
tus to develop copyright laws did not come about through a desire to protect the
“natural property rights” of authors. Indeed, most people I’ve encountered tend to
have the same misimpressions about copyright issues that they have about driving
their cars. Most people tend to think that it’s their “right” to operate any motor vehi-
cle they care to purchase. Similarly, they tend to believe that, since they also own the
texts they write, they ought to be able to control how those texts will be used and
ought to be able to profit from that use. And, of course, in actual practice, there are
few things in our day-to-day experiences to challenge these notions. Today, the use of
an automobile is so pervasive in our society that we just expect everyone to have ac-
cess to them.                               :
     And yet, those unfortunates who either fail to receive or somehow lose their dri-
ver’s license serve to remind us that operating an automobile is not a right we can ex-
254   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          pect; rather, it is a privilege we are granted by the government under certain specific cir-
          cumstances. Similarly, as legal historians such as Joseph Beard are quick to point out, a
          copyright or (literally speaking) the right to reproduce copies of a particular text was
          not and, indeed, is not a “natural unlimited property right.” Instead, it was and is a
          “limited privilege granted by the state” (Beard, 1974, p. 382). As with a driver’s license,
          the government gives writers license to “operate” texts in the public domain. What’s
          more, it makes the license so easy to obtain that we seem to forget that we’re dealing
          with an issue of privilege rather than of natural right. Yet, if we consider the origins of
          English and American copyright laws in the sixteenth century, we can quickly see that
          protecting an author’s natural right was never really an issue then either.
               During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the great new technological devel-
          opment was the printing press, and, just as today’s “computer revolution” is stimulat-
          ing the growth of new industries in information technology and electronic publish-
          ing, the printing press was producing tremendous growth in the book-publishing
          industry. Prior to the introduction of printing-press technology, the book trade de-
          pended on an excruciatingly slow and tremendously expensive publishing technol-
          ogy. Scribes, illustrators (then called limners), and book binders worked laboriously
          to produce each single copy of every book. Because of the enormous expense in-
          volved in this technology, most book-publishing efforts required the funding of either
          the Church or the Crown, a situation which made it easy for those in power to con-
          trol the kinds of texts which would be produced and consumed.
               Of course, the printing press changed all this. The radical reduction in produc-
          tion costs meant that texts could be produced and marketed cheaply and easily; yet,
          with a limited number of popular and lucrative texts available for publication, there
           was a dramatic increase in competition among book publishers. Two significant de-
           velopments resulted from this increased competition. First, people involved in vari-
           ous aspects of the book-publishing industry (i-e., limners, book binders, printers, etc.)
           banded together into a cooperative organization which came to be known as the
           Stationers’ Company. As Patterson and Lindberg (1991) point out, the Stationers
           were essentially a “group of businessmen who agreed to allow one of the[ir members]
           the exclusive right to publish a specific work in perpetuity” (p. 22). Thus, the
           Stationers created a voluntarily enforced form of copyright, which (though it did not
           carry the force of law and said nothing about the “natural rights” of authors) still of-
           fered book publishers limited protection against competition. In other words, the in-
           creased competition which brought about the development of the Stationers’
           Company clearly established the need to protect a publisher’s (though not an au-
           thor’s) copyright. Indeed, as Martha Woodmansee (1984) points out, it wasn’t until
           the eighteenth century that writers were able to realize any real profits from the com-
           petitive book trade in the form of royalties. In fact, even in the eighteenth century,
           copyrights were valuable properties:
               ...a flat sum remained customary, upon receipt of which the writer forfeited his [sic]
               rights to any profits his work might bring. His work became the property of the publisher,
               who would realize as much profit from it as he could. (pp. 435-436)

               The second result of this increased competition was that the Church and the
           Crown lost what had been their de facto control over the production and consump-
           tion of texts. Because of its new, more economical printing technology, the book-
                                                  Howard    #   Who   “Owns”   Electronic Texts?   255


publishing industry no longer needed to depend on Church or State subsidies, and,
consequently, publishers were free to produce texts which would not have received
the economic sanction of the Church or Crown. Indeed, given that the public is al-
ways fascinated with controversial texts and is therefore going to purchase more of
them, it seem likely that sixteenth-century publishers found new economic incen-
tives to publish texts which, ironically, challenged the same religious and govern-
mental authority which had been their chief means of support before the introduc-
tion of the printing press.
     As a result of these two developments (i.e., the Stationers’ desire to protect
themselves from competition and the Crown’s inability to control the publication of
subversive books), in 1556 Mary Tudor and Philip of Spain granted the Stationers a
royal charter, which stated in its preamble that it had been issued in order “To satisfy
the desire of the Crown for an effective remedy against the publishing of seditious
and heretical books” (Beard, 1974, p. 384). Furthermore, the Stationers’ royal charter
“limited most printing to members of that company and empowered the stationers to
search out and destroy unlawful books” (Patterson & Lindberg, 1991, p. 23). As a re-
sult, modern copyright law finds its origins not in the recognition and protection of
an author’s natural property rights, but, rather, in the “ignoble desire for censorship”
and in the greedy lust to “protect profit by prohibiting unlicensed competition”
(Beard, 1974, p. 383). And yet, despite the disturbing motives behind this early form
of copyright law, the Stationers’ royal charter is significant because it firmly estab-
lished the principle that a copyright is not the natural, absolute, or unlimited prop-
erty of any individual or company. Instead, to the degree that a copyright can be con-
sidered a form of property at all, the Stationers’ charter made it clear that to own a
copyright is essentially to own a limited license or a privilege which the state grants
in order to promote intellectual activities that are deemed to be in the best interests
of the state and its citizens.
     Although Mary Tudor, Parliament, and the U.S. Congress probably had very
different views of the desirability of censorship and book burning, the same princi-
ple of privilege that Mary established in the Stationers’ charter can be found in
Parliament’s 1709 passage of the Statute of Anne, the statute which in turn pro-
vided the basis for Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. Unlike the Stationers’
charter, both the statute of Anne and the Constitution recognize the rights of au-
thors. In fact, Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution provides that authors shall
have the “exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries,” thereby of-
fering writers the kind of protection which the Stationers’ charter gave only to
publishers. However, this provision does not assert that texts are the exclusive
property of their authors; instead, what the Constitution does is to give Congress
the legal authority to grant authors limited copyrights in order “To promote the
Progress of Science and the useful Arts.” In other words, as was the case with the
Stationers’ charter, copyright is still a privilege or license granted by the govern-
ment for a limited period of time in order to promote not only the right of authors
to profit from their labors, but also the enhancement of the public’s collective wel-
fare. Hence, just as the State of South Carolina makes laws which give me the right
to profit from certain uses of my car for four years and under specific circumstances
which are intended to protect and benefit my fellow citizens, the Constitution em-
powers Congress to make laws which give me the right to profit from certain uses of
256   Chapter 5 = Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          my texts for seventy-five years from their publication or’for a hundred years from
           their creation (whichever is shorter) and under specific circumstances which are
          intended to promote the economic and intellectual well-being of the American
          public.



           MAJOR PRINCIPLES OF U.S. COPYRIGHT LAW
          Now the upshot of all this law-making, privilege-granting, condition-making legal-
          speak is that the Constitution has come to represent the delicate balance between
          the rights of an individual and the good of the public. It represents a sometimes un-
          comfortable compromise, “balancing an author’s interest against the public interest
           in the dissemination of information affecting areas of universal concern, such as art,
           science, history, and business” (Van Bergen, 1992, p. 31). Copyright law in the
           United States recognizes that in order to encourage authors to produce the texts
           which will lead to the artistic, scientific, and technological discoveries that drive
           business and industry, it is essential that authors be allowed to realize a profit from
           their texts. Obviously, without the hope of profit, there is little incentive for a soft-
           ware developer to invest in the research required for the production of new computer
           applications, nor is there sufficient cause for a publishing house to pay large sums of
           money to photographers and writers in order to produce books which they cannot sell
           because the articles and photographs can be obtained more cheaply through some
           other means. In short then, U.S. copyright law is based on the simple principle that
           one has to spend money in the short term in order to make money in the long term;
           we have to pay for intellectual and economic progress by first investing in the mecha-
           nisms of research and development.
                On the other hand, copyright law doesn’t give authors and publishers the legal
           right to prevent the public from the “fair use” of texts. Indeed, I have already shown
           that individual authors are granted copyrights not because authors have a natural
           property right, but because such protection is in the public’s best interests. Thus, as
           Pierre Leval (1990) notes, “Fair use is not a grudgingly tolerated exception to the
           copyright owner’s rights of private property, but a fundamental policy of copyright
           law” (p. 1107).
                The public’s right to the fair use of texts is provided for in Statute 17, Section
           107 of the U.S. Code, and essentially what it does is to place limitations on the “ex-
           clusive Right to their Writings and Discoveries” that authors and inventors received
           in the Constitution. Section 107 grants the public the right to copy a work “for pur-
           poses such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple
           copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research.” Thus, the doctrine of fair use al-
           lows the use of texts for noncommercial purposes which are in the public’s best inter-
           ests. However, this does not mean that, for example, teachers can freely make photo-
           copies of entire textbooks for their classes or that a textbook publisher developing a
           multimedia presentation on the Vietnam War for high school history classes could
           freely use sequences from Apocalypse Now and The Deer Hunter in its stacks. Beyond
           granting the right to copy a work for educational purposes, the law further states that
           in determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use, the
           factors to be considered shall include the following:
                                                   Howard   ®   Who   “Owns”   Electronic Texts?   257


     * the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a com-
       mercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
     ¢ the nature of the copyrighted work;
     ¢ the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copy-
       tighted work as a whole; and
     ° the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted
       work. (17 U.S. Code, Sec. 107)

     Thus, even though the two parties mentioned here (teacher and publisher) are
using copyrighted texts for teaching purposes, they would both be considered guilty of
copyright infringement because, in the first case, the teacher is copying the whole
text and is interfering with the “potential market for” the textbook; and in the sec-
ond case, the publisher of the multimedia presentation would be profiting from the
commercial sale of its product to schools. Hence, in the doctrine of fair use, the bal-
ance between individual rights and public needs can once again be seen.
     In addition to the “fair use” of texts, the copyright statute imposes other limita-
tions on the exclusive rights of copyright holders, and one of the most important of
these restrictions is on those features of texts which are copyrightable. According to
the copyright statute in the U.S. Code, only the tangible expression of ideas belongs
to the copyright holder. Ideas are not copy protected. This limitation is of particular
interest because it gives perhaps the clearest articulation of the ways in which authors
can be said to own their texts, and clearly this limitation undermines the common-
place and romantic notion that a “person’s ideas are no less his property than his hogs
and horses” (Woodmansee, 1984, p. 434). Instead, there are two principles of owner-
ship being advanced here: first, that ideas are like universal laws of nature which, be-
cause they obtain for everyone, cannot be owned by any single person; and second,
that a new discovery, even though it may be the product of one individual’s intellec-
tual labor, owes its origins to the realm of public knowledge and should therefore be
considered communal property.
     In terms of actual practice, current copyright law does grant authors the right to
demand remuneration for their intellectual labors, and it does this by protecting the
ways authors express ideas. However, it does not allow them to claim ownership of
the ideas they express; authors cannot expect to have and maintain a monopoly on
truth. According to copyright law, since truths are either universal absolutes or social
constructions, they cannot be owned. Hence, if I write a piece of software that uses
the mathematical equation 2 + 2 = 4 as part of its code, I don’t have to pay anyone
for its use, nor can I expect to receive an honorarium every time someone           in the
United States calculates the sum of 2 + 2, because mathematical principles and algo-
rithms are thought to be universal truths. On the other hand, if people copy the way
I used an algorithm in my software, if they borrow my code’s structure or organization,
then they are using my expression, and that expression is copyrighted. Consequently,
while authors can’t expect to profit from ideas and truths, they can expect to receive
remuneration for the labor required to uncover and to formulate those ideas and
truths. Although it’s important to remember, as the doctrine of fair use makes clear,
there are still certain public uses even of an author’s form of expression for which the
copyright holder cannot expect to be compensated.
     Before reading further, answer Question | in “Developing Your Understanding.”
258   Chapter 5 ® Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          COPYRIGHTS IN THE ELECTRONIC ENVIRONMENT
          This examination of the historical origins and principles which inform modern U.S.
          copyright law reveals that the commonly held belief that authors own the texts they
          produce does not accurately reflect the actual legal status of textual ownership.
          Although it is correct to say that authors do indeed own a copyright as soon as a text
          is produced and that they therefore enjoy the rights of copy protection, it is impor-
          tant that both the producers and consumers of texts understand that those rights ex-
          ist in the form of a limited privilege granted by the State and that those rights obtain
          only under certain conditions specified by the State.
               And yet, while professional communicators need to understand the general prin-
          ciples upon which current copyright law is based in order to function effectively in
          the electronic workplace, it’s also important to understand that those same principles
          don’t always yield clear answers when we have to deal with electronic texts. A profes-
          sional writer may know that copyright is only a privilege, that the public has the right
          to certain “fair uses” of texts, and that only the form of expression is protected in a
          work; yet, this knowledge may still leave the writer unsure as to the exact copyright
          status of a particular electronic text in a particular situation. As Marilyn Van Bergen
          (1992) has noted, “there is good reason why the law is often symbolized by scales used
          as weighing instruments” (p. 31), and this is particularly true for copyright law since,
          as | have shown, it seeks to balance the rights of the individual against the needs of
          the public, since it represents a compromise among three competing theories of intel-
          lectual property, and since technological changes have, historically, represented chal-
          lenges for existing forms of copy protection.
               Still, in spite of the fact that the nature of copyright law makes it difficult to say
           for certain that a particular situation does or does not represent a copyright infringe-
           ment, an understanding of copyright principles can still serve as a useful guide for
           professional communicators. To show how this is the case, I wish now to return to the
           scenarios with which | began this essay in order to illustrate how these principles can
           at least help writers either avoid litigation or recover the remuneration they are due.


           Scenario 1

           In this scenario, a member of a document-design team is planning to scan a famous
           photograph from a popular magazine in order to manipulate a portion of it for the
           cover of the company’s annual report. The central questions here are (1) does such a
           reproduction fall under the doctrine of fair use and (2) who owns the copyright on
           the image?
                As far as the question of fair use is concerned, it seems highly probable that this
           would not be considered a fair use of the original work. Since the reproduction is not
           being made for educational, news reporting, or critical purposes, its use is still copy
           protected. Furthermore, as Brad Bunnin (1990) points out in his extremely informa-
           tive article “Copyrights and Wrongs,” even though an image has been manipulated,
           it may still be “legally considered a derivation of an original work” (p. 77), and there-
           fore its reproduction will require the permission of the copyright holder. In his article,
           Bunnin also reproduces an electronically manipulated version of Munch’s famous
                                                   Howard    ®   Who   “Owns”   Electronic Texts?   259


painting The Scream; yet, in spite of the fact that The Scream is a famous painting in
the public domain, and in spite of the fact that Bunnin’s derivative reproduction is a
new image, Bunnin received permission from the museum which owned the painting
“and paid a $250 fee to manipulate it” (p. 77). Similarly, the member of the docu-
ment-design team should receive permission before reproducing and manipulating
the photograph.
     As to the question of who should be contacted in order to receive permission to
reproduce the image, the issue is a bit more complicated. Probably the safest course
for the document designer is to purchase and receive permission to reproduce a copy
of the photograph from the publishing house which owns the copyright on the origi-
nal photograph rather than using the magazine’s reproduction. The reason for this is
that derivative works are also copy protected. As Nicholas Miller and Carol
Blumenthal (1986) observe, “Copyright laws protect an author's rights in his own ex-
pression even when that expression makes use of nonoriginal information” (p. 229).
For example, were I to copy Bunnin’s manipulated version of The Scream, I would be
responsible to Bunnin’s publisher. Thus, in order to avoid infringing on what may be
considered a derivative work in the magazine’s reproduction of the photograph, the
document designer should obtain a copy of the original photo from the original copy-
right holder.


Scenario 2

In this comparatively straightforward scenario, a writer is instructed by the office
manager to copy desktop-publishing software which the company had previously pur-
chased for use on another employee’s computer. Here, the central question is whether
purchasing a copyrighted work gives one the right to copy it.
    There is an unfortunate, though common, misconception that, when individuals
or companies own a copy of a book or a piece of software, they can use their property
as they see fit. However, as the privilege principle makes clear, “owning” a text or
even a copy of a text is not the same as having the right to copy a work. Typically,
when I purchase a text, the only “property” that I “own” is the actual physical copy of
the book, computer disks, photograph, painting, compact disk, etc. However, owner-
ship of this physical property doesn’t give me the right to copy the text. In order to
copy the work, I also have to have purchased a license to copy it.
    Today, most software publishers do, in fact, sell consumers limited licenses to
copy their software. Usually, diskettes are sold in shrink-wrapped or sealed packages
so that opening the package constitutes an acceptance of the conditions of the lim-
ited license to copy the software. Exactly which copyrights are granted in these li-
censes varies from software package to software package; however, the most common
form of licensing agreement allows consumers only to make backup copies for protec-
tion and to install (i.e., copy) the software on one system for use by one individual. In
terms of the scenario, if this is the sort of license which was purchased by the com-
pany, then it would be a violation of copyright law to install the desktop-publishing
software on a second system.
     However, before the writer in this scenario refuses the office manager’s instruc-
tions to copy the software, it would be a very good idea to check the exact terms of
260   Chapter 5 ®   Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          the license agreement. It may well be that the company purchased a “site license” for
          the software, in which case the software might legally be copied onto the second sys-
          tem. Companies often purchase site licenses which allow them to copy software on
          several machines or to install software on their local-area networks so that the soft-
          ware can then be copied into the memories of a number of individual computers at
          the site, the exact number of copies possible being specified by the terms of the site’s
          licensing agreement.


          Scenario 3
          In this scenario, a writer is preparing an article for the journal Technical
          Communication and wishes to quote a passage from an e-mail message that had been
          posted to an electronic discussion group. The central questions here are (1) whether
          such a use is protected by the fair use clause and (2) whether the author of the mes-
          sage, the owner of the discussion group, or the university which owns the host com-
          puter for the group is the copyright holder for the message.
               Currently, it would probably be considered legal for the writer to quote a short
          passage from such an e-mail message. The doctrine of fair use allows the reproduction
          of short passages for the kinds of news reporting and critical purposes typical of arti-
          cles found in Technical Communication. However, the situation here is clouded by the
          technology involved and the lack of specificity in the fair use clause. The fair use
          clause requires that, in addition to considering the purposes for and the amount of
          the work being copied, “the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of
          the copyrighted work” should also be taken into consideration (17 U.S. Code, Sec.
          107). Thus, the author of the e-mail message may feel that her copyright has been vi-
          olated since she has not been given the opportunity to publish the work through
          more traditional means, where the potential for remuneration is greater. In other
          words, the author of the e-mail message may be able to argue that her right to report
          on the research has been “upstaged,” and therefore its potential value has been di-
          minished.
               However, although there is some validity to this argument, it seems more likely
          that sending an e-mail message to a discussion group would be considered a form of
          publication, so the author of the e-mail message can’t really argue that the work has
          been upstaged. Indeed, while the exact copyright status of texts sent to and distrib-
          uted by electronic discussion groups is still unclear and can vary widely from group to
          group, more and more groups are operating as electronic publications. In fact, groups
          like PACS-L, PMC, and E-Journal have received ISSN numbers, giving them the
          same copyright status granted to more traditional print publications. In other groups
          where discussions are open and unmoderated, the groups’ owners may explicitly state
          that the copyrights belong solely to the authors of the messages sent to the groups.
          And in yet another type of group, members of the group may have a more or less tacit
          agreement not to quote or cite each other’s messages at all, making it unethical
          (though not necessarily illegal) to quote their messages. Thus, even though quoting
          from the e-mail message sent to the electronic discussion group would probably be
          considered fair use regardless of the type of group, the writer of the article in this sce-
          nario should first contact the discussion group’s owner for more information since the
                                                   Howard   #® Who   “Owns”   Electronic Texts?   261


owner operates as an agent for the university and would be able to describe the quot-
ing practices of the group. If the group has an ISSN number, then quoting from the
message is acceptable under the conditions specified by the doctrine of fair use. If the
group does not have an ISSN number, then the safest and most ethical course is to at-
tempt to secure the permission of the e-mail message’s author before quoting from the
message.

Scenario 4

In this scenario, an employee discovers that his personal e-mail messages to a fellow
employee are being monitored and redistributed by managers in the company. The
central question here is whether copyright laws offer the employee any protection
against this use of his messages.
     Although the employee may have some legal means of preventing the manage-
ment from monitoring and redistributing his messages in this case, it is unlikely that
this problem can be best solved through an appeal to copyright laws because the priv-
ilege principle upon which copyright law is based does not give authors a “natural un-
limited property right” to their texts (Beard, 1974, p. 382). Because a company pays
for an employee’s time and provides the resources the employee uses to produce texts,
the company has certain rights to the use of the texts created. Usually, in fact, the
company is the sole copyright holder of the texts its employees produce while in the
company’s employ. However, in some cases (particularly in university settings), an in-
stitution may receive only a percentage of the remuneration due to the copyright
holder since part of the work was accomplished with the institution’s resources and
part of the work was done on the writer’s own time. In this scenario, since the com-
pany’s resources were used to produce and distribute the e-mail messages, this does
give the company some limited rights in the use of those messages. Consequently, the
issue here is probably not one of copyright infringement; rather, it is one of privacy.
     In a similar case at Epson America, an employee was allegedly fired because she
questioned her supervisor's right to read employees’ e-mail messages. The employee is
currently suing Epson not for copyright infringement, but because monitoring and re-
distributing employees’ private e-mail messages “violated a California law that makes
it a crime for a person or company to eavesdrop or record confidential communica-
tion without the consent of both the sender and the receiver” (Branscum, 1991, p.
63). Similarly, in this particular scenario, the employee should probably seek appeal
to either state or federal privacy laws rather than claiming copyright infringement.

Scenario 5
In this scenario, a university employee is attempting to publish a Hypercard stack
which was produced on the university’s computers and which reorganizes the job in-
formation compiled from a copyrighted source. The central questions here are (1)
whether the university is entitled to some portion of the royalties received for the
stack’s publication and (2) whether using the data but not the organization or expres-
sion from another work constitutes a copyright infringement.
     As was discussed in the previous scenario, since the university’s resources were
used to develop the stack, the university has the right to expect some remuneration
262   Chapter 5 #   Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



          for the use of its facilities. Thus, the faculty member should make arrangements to
          share a percentage of the profits with the university.
               The question of whether the reorganization of data compiled in another source
          constitutes a copyright infringement is much more difficult, however. As was previ-
          ously discussed, copyright law protects only an author’s expression. Yet, in the case of
          reference materials and databases such as business lists, telephone directories, bibli-
          ographies, or indexes, virtually the only form of tangible expression is the way the
          data are organized. Furthermore, as Miller and Blumenthal (1986) have pointed out,
          with the recent developments in information technologies, “computer databases con-
          tain randomly stored information which can be retrieved by a computer program in a
          wide variety of ways. There is no ‘organization’ to protect” (p. 229). Consequently,
          two fundamental principles of copyright law come into conflict in this scenario. On
          the one hand, there is the principle dating all the way back to the Stationers’ charter,
          which recognizes that publishers and authors must be able to expect a profit from
          their labors if they are going to continue to have the incentives required to produce
          valuable new texts. On the other hand, there is the principle that ideas and knowl-
          edge cannot be the property of any one individual and that only the expression of the
          ideas belongs to the author or copyright holder.
               As is the case with most electronic texts today, it is not yet clear how Congress or
          the courts will decide to deal with these kinds of challenges to the fundamental prin-
          ciples of current copyright law. It may well be that, because hypertexts and electronic
          databases allow users rather than authors to determine the ultimate organization and
          shape of these electronic texts, future copyright laws will need to find radical new
          foundations. In fact, in a 1976 act, Congress did make a number of changes to the
          copyright statute in the U.S. Code precisely because of technological developments
          in the television, music, and computer industries. One of these changes was to
          Section 103, which now “provides that copyright may be had for compilations, but
          protection extends only to the material contributed by the author, not to preexisting
          material that is used in the compilation” (Patterson & Lindberg, 1991, p. 93; see also
           17 U.S. Code, Sec. 103). In terms of the scenario here, then, this suggests that the
          faculty member’s use of the information would not be a copyright infringement be-
          cause the original compiler’s expression has been avoided and also because Section
          103 seems to reaffirm the notion that data are part of the public domain.
               However, law courts are conservative institutions, and it seems likely that a sce-
          nario like this one will also be resolved according to precedents such as Leon v. Pacific
          Telephone and Telegraph Co. In this 1937 court case, the defendant essentially
          changed the alphabetical organization of a telephone directory to a numerical order
          based on telephone numbers, thereby using the data but not the plaintiff's mode of
          expression. Yet, in spite of the fact that the defendant did not encroach upon the
          plaintiff’s expression, the court ruled that this was, nevertheless, a copyright infringe-
          ment. As Miller and Blumenthal (1986) point out, the effect of this decision has
          been that “some of the recent cases which follow Leon have explicitly stated that the
          compiler’s labor is what should be protected” (p. 229). In other words, when the
          courts have been required to choose between protecting a publisher’s incentives to
          produce texts and consumers’ rights to use a work’s content but not its mode of ex-
          pression, the courts appear to believe that protecting a producer’s incentives is in the
                                                        Howard     ® Who    “Owns”    Electronic Texts?   263


best long-term interests of the public. Thus, in this scenario, the safest and most con-
servative course would be to negotiate some kind of financial arrangement with the
persons holding the copyright on the reference materials used in the stack.


CONCLUSION
As these scenarios have illustrated, the new electronic environment in which profes-
sional writers must now function makes intellectual property and copyright issues
more and more a part of their everyday experience in the workplace. Today’s profes-
sional communicators need to have a more thorough understanding of the principles
upon which modern copyright laws are based than ever before. As the discussion of
the scenarios has shown, an understanding of these principles may not allow a writer
to predict with any degree of certainty how a court of law will rule in a particular
case; however, I would argue that such an understanding can at least offer profes-
sional communicators some sense of how to avoid copyright infringements. And
given the enormous cost of litigation, both in terms of actual dollars and potential
damage to a career, I would argue that knowing how to navigate through the intellec-
tual property minefield is a tremendously valuable skill.
References
    Beard, J. (1974). The copyright issue. Annual Review of Information Science and
       Technology, 9, 381-411.
    Branscum, D. (1991, March). Ethics, e-mail, and the law: When legal ain’t necessar-
       ily right. Macworld, 63, 66-67, 70, 72, 83.
    Bunnin, B. (1990, April). Copyrights and wrongs: How to keep your work on the
       right side of copyright law. Publish, 76-82.
    Leval, P. (1990, March). Toward a fair use standard. Harvard Law Review, 1105-1136.
    Miller, N., & Blumenthal, C. (1986). Intellectual property issues. In A.W.
        Branscomb (Ed.), Toward a law of global communication networks (pp. 227-237).
       New York: Longman.
    Patterson, L.R., & Lindberg, S.W. (1991). The nature of copyright: A law of users’
       rights. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
    Van Bergen, M. (1992, July/August). Copyright law, fair use, and multimedia.
       EDUCOM       Review, 27, 31-34.
    Woodmansee, M. (1984). The genius and the copyright: Economic and legal condi-
       tions of the emergence of the ‘author.’ Eighteenth-Century Studies, 17(4), 425-448.

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. [FOR THIS QUESTION, STOP READING BEFORE THE LAST TWO SECTIONS] Based on the
    general principle of copyright that the goal is to maintain “balance between the rights of
    an individual and the good of the public,” argue what the professional writers should do
    in two of the opening scenarios. Assess how your recommended actions achieve this
    general principle of balance. Then, after reading the final two sections of Howard's article,
    be prepared to discuss in class the points, if any, where you and Howard disagree.
 2. Referring to the arguments laid out by Howard, create a one-page copyright handout that
    professional writers could use as a quick reference and reminder. Your handout should
    have a clear definition of copyright and offer copyright principles that can help profes-
264   Chapter 5 #   Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action



               sional writers think through issues of copyright within particular circumstances. The hand-
               out should also be carefully designed, so writers can use it as a quick reference (this is
               not an essay). Apart from these requirements, remaining content is up to you.
             . Referring to the five scenarios opening the article, Howard argues that “the new elec-
               tronic environment in which professional writers must now function makes intellectual
               property and copyright issues more and more a part of their everyday experience in the
               workplace.” For three of the five scenarios, identify and discuss the features that make
               these scenarios part of a “new electronic environment.” Then, analyze how these copy-
               right issues would be less possible, less frequent, or even impossible in an environment
               lacking the electronic features you identify.
             . What is legal may not necessarily be ethical; and under certain circumstances, what is
               ethical may not be legal. Still, professional writers are bound by both legal and ethical
               systems. Furthermore, technological contexts can complicate the balance between legal
               and ethical “goods.” For instance, technologies have dramatically increased our capabili-
               ties of surveillance, making surveillance almost ubiquitous. Though it rnay be legal, for in-
               stance, for companies to “observe” what their employees are writing on e-mail, strictly
               policing e-mail use during breaks and lunches creates a relationship between employers
               and employees which may not reflect an ethic that is desired by either party.
                     Choose one or two of the opening scenarios as examples to discuss how technolog-
               ical context(s) can make it difficult for professional writers to strike an appropriate bal-
               ance between legal and ethical responsibilities.
            CHAPTER            5

            Projects
     1. At the opening of his article, Bernhardt argues the following: “We need to constantly ap-
        praise the broad drifts in the shape of text—to anticipate what now constitutes and what will
        soon constitute a well-formed text. We need to think about how readers interact with text—
        what they do with it and how. We need to anticipate where text is going: the shape of text to
        come.’ Only recently have professional writers begun grappling with the changes in text trig-
        gered by the Web and other online media. Yet currently, and certainly by the time you read
        this, texts’ shapes are becoming increasingly more dynamic and fluid with such technologies
        as Macromedia’s Flash and Shockwave, as well as the increasingly more affordable high-
        speed computer processors and band-width connections that support them.
        Individually or in groups of three of four, develop three versions of one document: a print
        version, a basic hypertext version, and a dynamic hypertextual version (e.g., using Flash,
        steaming video, and/or at least some of the dynamic features, like roller-overs, now built
REBHEE
EHH
        into many Web authoring packages). When choosing your project, keep the audience and
 SHOHSHHOHSESHSHSHSHETHSHSCHHTHESHHEHSOHESHEESEKHES
 POSS


        purpose stable; consider this a project that requires you reach the same set of readers for
        the same purpose but you need to offer your readers several media alternatives.
        Also, do not approach this project as one requiring you to simply translate a print version
        into HTML, or vice versa. Instead, work with each medium independently and make it your
        goal to take advantage of each medium’s strengths. (To avoid the impulse of simply translat-
        ing print texts into these other media, consider working first with hypertext.)
        Based on your experience developing these three versions, and supported by other forms of
        research (e.g., literature reviews, interviews, and/or observations), write a brief article length
        argument anticipating the shape(s) of texts to come. (The report should be co-authored if
        you have been working as a group.) Your reports can be submitted as presentations at pro-
        fessional! or undergraduate research conferences, like the Society for Technical
        Communication (STC) and the National Council for Undergraduate Research (NCUR); sub-
        mitted as articles for professional writing publications, like Technical Communication; or col-
        lected and published as a class research project on the Web.
      . "With automated print and Web design templates, boilerplating, and automated grammar
        checks,” your boss argues, “there is really no reason to keep a publications department.”
        She goes on to argue that “most routine writing tasks can be delegated to department sec-
        retaries and staff and the less routine writing tasks can be easily accomplished by depart-
        ment managers, especially now that the voice recognition word processing software is
        working well.”
        This is not such an unlikely scenario. As Karen Schriver reports, “Although the rhetorical ap-
        proach to writing dominates the academic writing scene, it has not yet made a large impact
        on writing in the workplace. Regrettably, some managers still think of writers as glorified
        secretaries” (Dynamics in Document Design, p. 75). As a result, Schriver goes on to argue,
        “writers are finding that they must be able to demonstrate how they ‘add value’ to organi-
        zations. ... They must be good at explaining what they do—its complexity and sophistica-
      ~ tion—in ways that educate managers, colleagues, and clients” (77). Now is a good time to
        prepare for such situations, especially since in the workplace you rarely have the luxury of


                                                                                                             265
266   Chapter 5 ®   Professional Writing as Technologically Situated Action


             saying to your boss, “I've got reasons why what you're arguing’doesn’t make good sense,
             but let me do some research and get back to you on this later.”
             Individually or in groups of two or three, research the value that professional writers add to
             organizations. Then, develop an easily distributable print document or a Web page arguing
             the organizational value of professional writers, even in the face of such technological ad-
             vances as those represented in the scenario above. Your document should serve one of two
             audiences and purposes. Either it should be a resource professional writers can use to help
             them argue their value, or it should be a document directed at managers with the aim of ar-
             guing the organizational value of professional writers.
           . Writers have always been responsible for helping readers easily navigate their way through
             texts. Different writing technologies have encouraged, and even demanded, different forms
             of navigation, and as writing technologies change, issues of textual navigation become in-
             creasingly important for writers and readers. This project asks you to focus on the naviga-
             tional aspects of writing/reading.
             In pairs or groups of three, locate six to eight samples of four different types of documents
             (e.g., brochures, a Web site, and a technical manual). This should lead you to a collection of
             24 to 32 different documents arranged in four categories. Closely analyze the various naviga-
             tional strategies writers build into these documents and readers use to find their way around
             them. Based on your analysis of your document sampling, develop your own scheme for cat-
             egorizing navigational strategies. Finally, prepare a 30-minute presentation and hands-on
             workshop designed to help writers expand their repertoire of navigational strategic knowl-
             edge. Potential audiences for your presentation/workshop include another group in your
             class, another advanced writing class on campus (e.g., a technical writing service course), a
             conference workshop session group, or a group of working writers meeting for a brown-bag
             session.
| Professional
- NGOICTIONG) IS
See                             Oeme liye,

    Civees 6 and 7 include readings that examine more closely how professional
           writing and rhetoric is affected when writing is understood as a productive
    art—a way of producing or making something. As you have read elsewhere in this
:   collection, professional writing and rhetoric can be understood as either a productive
> art or a form of practice, or even as both. Professional Writing and Rhetoric approaches
> it as both. Part 2 examined professional writing and rhetoric as a form of socially con-
* _ textualized practice and action. Part 3 now looks at professional writing and rhetoric
>   as an art of production.
;        Most people find it natural to think about writing as an art of making, what the
> classical rhetoricians called a techné, and find it rather difficult to reconsider writing
: as a form of social action. When people write, it seems common sense that something
:   is produced or made. The something that writers produce is a text. Easy enough. But
: is that all writers produce? And is there anything that distinguishes the kinds of texts
:   that professional writers produce?
°        Chapter 6 picks up on this latter question: Is there anything that distinguishes
: the kinds of texts that professional writers produce? Professional Writing and Rhetoric
: defines professional writing as organizationally situated authorship, which narrows
> the field to writing done within organizational contexts of some form. This does not
> necessarily imply industry and government contexts. Civic, church, and community
> groups also form organizational contexts. Even freelance writers, whose title suggests
> a freedom from organizational life, work typically for and/or with organizations of
* some sort.
:        In any of these organizational contexts where professional writers ply the arts of
: gituational authorship, one feature distinguishes their writing from other sorts of writ-



COP   SSOCHHSHEHHOHOF   OHS   TOSHEE   APO   HFHHOSTCHOHHOHHHSHHHOHOTHHHOHOHHEHHTHOHRHHHHOHHHSTHHHSHHHHOHHTHOTHTOHAHHOTHHHEOHEE   267
268   Part 3 #   Professional Writing as Productive Art



           ing: it is user-centered. In other words, professional writers produce texts that are to
           be used by readers. Such use can take various forms: readers can use texts to make de-
           cisions, to explore problems, to collect information, to guide action, to govern, to
           judge, etc., etc. No matter what a text will be used for, though, the art of professional
           writing and rhetoric is distinguished by its focus on producing user-centered texts.
           The readings in Chapter 6 explore this issue with some depth.
                Chapter 7 picks up on the first question above: Do writers produce only texts?
           Certainly, the primary product of professional writing is text. That term should be
           understood quiet broadly. A text can fall under a number of genres—newsletters,
           brochures, memos, reports, presentations, advertisements, Web pages, etc.—as well as
           a number of media—print, video, CD, hypertext, etc. If we understand text in this
           broad sense, then professional writers certainly produce texts, and texts are certainly
           their primary product. But do professional writers produce anything other than texts?
                As you have probably noticed in earlier readings and maybe from internship or
           job experience, professional writers are often involved in project management. In or-
           der to get texts to publication, writers have to work with a number of other people:
           graphic artists, researchers, marketing specialists, publishers, etc. Jn this managerial
           work, professional writers produce something other than a text: they produce work-
           place processes and relationships. Chapter 7 refers to such a product as “social space.”
           That is, by managing the production of texts, professional writers are often active in
           producing the social spaces in which people work together. But social space is not
           only something external or tangential to texts. Texts themselves participate in pro-
           ducing different sorts of social space. Think of this simple example: If 1 am writing a
           report and want to make sure that certain people have read and signed off on the re-
           port, by adding a set of signature spaces on the front of my report, | have produced a
           text that produces a subscribed set of relationships between people and ideas. My text
           has participated in producing social space.
                As you read Chapters 6 and 7 in Part 3, focus on the ways professional writers are
           and might be involved in the production—and reproduction—of social spaces.
                Professional Writers
                Produce User-Centered
                Documents

      INTRODUCTION
SOHESHOSHHO
 SESH
 HOTT
 SHEL
 EOREHED
 SPST




      When people think about what professional writers ee               the obvious first re-
      sponse has to do with texts of some sort. F                           :


      One of the distinguishing characteristics that is true across a broad range of profes-
      sional writing contexts is that professional writers produce user-centered
                                                                             texts.
              That ay   two Tee        still loom: MMi           seats erect oeand how

      These, and the following, are questions you should consider as you read the selections
      in Chapter 6:
              ® What does it mean to be reader- or user-centered?
              ® How does user-centered writing affect what writers do?
              © How does user-centered writing affect what writers must know?
              e What can writers do to develop user-centered practices?
           One of the key issues in producing user-centered documents is determining how
      writers understand their audiences/readers. Most introductory writing textbooks urge
      writers “to think about their audience. Reel              acon Seixtieaeiasbeen’s
     se       ROI:         repent or, te                e spent great care categorizing and
     analyzing possible audiences, and such audience analyses can be traced throughout
     the rhetorical tradition. Even though rhetoricians have long focused on analyzing
     one’s audience, their methods for doing so have shifted greatly.
          Unlike many writers who simply imagine possible audiences and assess their pos-
     sible reactions to thei          hey write in order to draft and 1revise in an audience-

     (                                             art of the reason
     done so is that


                                                                                                 269
270   Chapter 6 = Professional Writers Produce