User-Centered Documents




          readers. If a critical essay is not usable or effective, readers will not read it, won’t fin-
           ish reading it, or will not change the ways they think or act because of it. The impact
           of being unusable or ineffective is not that great on the reader/user. The same does
          not hold truealles a set of instructio

          hee are a wide range efseTN impacts:ake nrodied can < a bad reputation, he
          product could have low sales, the producer of the product could be taken to court, or
          the reader/user could be injured.
               Instructions are just one genre that professional writers might produce. As you
          read the selections in Chapter 6, think about how other genres might be used by
          readers and focus on how you as a professional writer can increase the usability of the
          documents you might eventually produce.
               One way professional writers increase the usability of documents is by paying
          qpesiulariGACeh ceicheasis alase                         KC
                                                                    osteo ick, in the first selection of the
          chapter, develops a systematic approach to designing rhetorically effective visual
          texts. Johnson, in the following selection, focuses our attention on the ways we think
          about being user-centered and the processes we practice to produce user-centered
          documents.



           HERE   THORERHEEEREORGHRERHHOEEREKE   ED   seve   PRA    OHOSH   ERE   AHEROKHHERTKOEHHK
                                                                                           ORE TEE EKERETE EUS


             FOCUSING         ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
             Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
             Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
             lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
             in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
             the field itself.
              1. low visual intensity
             2. high visual intensity
             3. visual signs
             4. alphanumeric mode
             5. spatial mode
             6. graphic mode
             7. intra-textual level
             8. inter-textual level
             9. extra-textual level
            10. supra-textual level
           Kostelnick        = A Systematic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication                         271

           PeRSSHORK    GEARED     ee



     A SYSTEMATIC DysreVIe:CH TO> VISUAL
     LANGUA GE a BUSINESS (COMMUNICATION
     TRERPRRE
         TSAR ERE DE SDS                 28
                                                                                                            SHAPERHD


       CHARLES KOSTELNICK
       Iowa State University


    Ae             business communication relies heavily on the visual, current ap-
          proaches to graphics and text design are prescriptive and unsystematic. A 12-
    cell schema of visual coding modes and levels provides a model for describing and
    evaluating business documents as flexible SLES of visual language. SHUUDESELES
    clarity and objectivity, the




        Writing does not communicate until it is seen, until it becomes an artifact for vi-
    sual inspection (Gelb, 1980). From the primitive making of lists, business communi-
    cators have created permanent records by transcribing symbols onto two-dimensional
    surfaces. With the proliferation of print technology formerly reserved for specialists,
    contemporary business communicators have unprecedented control over visual de-
    sign. However, participation in a visually intensive “print culture” (Ong, 28) does
    not Ge taaeee visual sensibility.                                              ns    né


                            :                                       ne in theory Ane ap-
    plication, visual Gaiennce in business cormmunication remains rudimentary and pre-
    scriptive, and ‘confined to a superficial or decorative rather than a functional or
    rhetorical role in the communication process.
         To compensate, we need a systematic approach for analyzing how visual elements
    affect the readability and the rhetoric of business documents, and even for es IRe
    the visual elements                                                         :
'                                           ae:                                   The ere
    language of Geinees communication is a foibles system ofcomminele marks, and spa-
    tial variations that operates on several levels within and outside the text. Used effec-
    tively, visual language enables readers to process information—in letters, brochures,
reports, newsletters—clearly and efficiently. The “information design” movement has
generated guidelines for creating functional, user-oriented documents. However, far
from being generic or rhetorically “neutral” (Kinross, 1985), visual choices are bound
to a perceptual and rhetorical context. Each document embodies an autonomous sys-

Source:Kostelnick, Charles. “A Systemic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication.” The Journal of Business
Communication, Volume 25, Issue 3 (Summer 1988), pp. 29-48. Reprinted with permission.
272   Chapter 6 =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          tem requiring adaptation to a particular audience and putpose. Visual planning and
          invention, therefore, must be part of the global strategy of the document and thor-
          oughly integrated into the writing process.


          THE SPECTRUM OF VISUAL INTENSITY
          Writing and reading are intensely visual acts in which writer and reader negotiate
          meaning on a two-dimensional field. Since this field can be varied and manipulated
          into infinite configurations, all documents are not visual in the same way or to the
          same degree (Bernhardt, 1986). Thus we could devise a spectrum of visual intensity
          ranging from very low to very high:

                     LOW VISUAL                                           HIGH VISUAL
                      INTENSITY          ;                           2     INTENSITY

          What, then, are the limits of such a continuum? What characteristics determine
          whether a document has a high or low level of visual intensity?
              At the low end we might place a conventional essay or report, which submerges
          explanations   and arguments       in continuous   text,   or a novel   with   its symbols,
          metaphors, and complex narrative strands that readers must extract from seamless
          blocks of text (Bernhardt, 1986; Herrstrom, 1984). Still, even a novel relies on spa-
          tial segmentation—books, chapters, paragraphs—to signal transitions in place, time,
          and voice (Sterne even includes his own diagrams). The low end of the continuum
          calls for something far less visual: ideally, a string of unembellished signs flowing in a
          single direction, unrestricted by margins or pages. Rendering the text entirely in up-
          per case and eliminating punctuation would further reduce visual dependency. The
          reader would then have no sense of spatial direction other than the syntactic rela-
          tions of linguistic signals. Like a message moving across a video screen in an airport,
          the text would approximate the perceptual impermanence of an utterance.
               At the high end of the visual continuum, designing and seeing assume a far
          greater role in shaping and receiving the message. As text is segmented into chunks,
          chunks into lists, and lists into matrices, charts, and diagrams, words become “thing-
           like” (Ong, 1982) entities transfixed spatially and graphically (through line work, ar-
           rows, geometric forms) on the page. Even more thing-like and reliant on visual inspec-
           tion are representative images—for example, a picture in a proposal of key employees
           seated around a conference table. Still, visual intensity does not necessarily depend on
           realism because messages can be purely visual but abstract. For example, to show the
           enrollment patterns of a college, I can use pictures of each class or even of each stu-
           dent (achieving optimum realism), but a bar chart or a line graph would display the
           trends more clearly and concisely and with greater visual immediacy.
                Thus on one end of the spectrum we might place a purely (or as pure as possible,
           given that it must be seen) linguistic message, on the other end a purely visual mes-
           sage which defies simple translation into words. However, the conditions for the ex-
           tremes rarely obtain: most business documents are visual hybrids. When transferred
           to the page, the linear message flashing across the screen undergoes a visual metamor-
         Kostelnick   = A Systematic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication       273


phosis: words are shaped by a type style, underlined, thickened, segmented into lines,
distributed vertically and horizontally across the page, and circumscribed by graphic
marks. The picture of the employees at the conference table, on the other hand, can
be reduced to a line drawing, a plan view of the office, a corporate logo, or a series of
abstract marks, each of which (including a color photo) may depend on linguistic
coding to make any sense. And so inside the extremes of the continuum occurs a vast
intermingling of visual signs, and of the visual and the verbal. Like a chemical reac-
tion, the signs are interdependent: different combinations alter the visual effects of
individual signs, which collectively alter the meaning of the message. Because these
combinations are bound perceptually and rhetorically to context,




A SCHEMA OF VISUAL LANGUAGE
What, then, are the  constituent elements of visual language? First, we need to define
the coding modes that comprise the raw materials of visual language; and second, the
levels at which the modes operate within actual documents.
     Visual language can be encoded in three modes:




     ©     Spe                          phe                9olic   and graphic
                                                                             signs acrossa
         plane, creating visual syntax among textual or graphic particles.
     These coding modes are integrated on four distinct levels: intra-, inter-, extra-,
and supra-textual. Together these four levels and three modes comprise a 12-cell
schema of visual language.!
     The Intra-textual level (cells 1-3) is coded primarily in the alphanumeric/sym-
bolic mode and controls the local form, size, posture, and embellishment of textual
elements. Consider the following sample of text:
    During the past month, our clientele in each region has increased as follows: East Region,
    31 clients; South Region, 40 clients; and West Region, 25 clients.

    In the alphanumeric/symbolic mode (cell 1), I can select a typeface with or with-
out serifs, change the thickness (bold, light) or posture (e.g., italics) of the typeface,
choose upper or lower case, and use symbols (&, $, #) in place of words; in the spatial
mode (cell 2), enlarge or shrink the type size, choose the linear spacing between
characters and words (12 pitch; 10 CPI; tight or loose spacing, kerning); and in the
eraphic mode (cell 3) use marks to regulate the linear flow of text (commas, periods,
colons) or to emphasize key ideas (underlining), or transform letters into expressive
274   Chapter 6 =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



                                A 12-Cell Schema of Visual Communication:
                                    Four Levels and Three Coding Modes
                  Alphanumeric/Symbolic                   Spatial                    Graphic
                     ]                              2                          3
                    micro-level textual form:       local spacing be-          marks: punctua-
          Intra     style, size, weight, and pos-   tween characters           tion, underscoring;
                    ture of letters, numbers,       and textual particles:     iconicity of letters
                    and symbols                     CPI, picas, kerning        and words

                    4                               5)                         6
                    serial and segmenting de-       vertical/horizontal        cueing devices:
          Inter     vices: headings, letters,       arrangement of text:       bullets, icons; syn-
                    numbers; typestyle varia-       line endings, inden-       tactic devices: line
                    tions showing textual           tation; lists, matrices,   work and arrows
                    structure                       trees, flow diagrams       on tables, charts,
                                                                               diagrams
                    7
                                                    8                          9
                    decoding devices: legends,      configuration of           schematic: lines,
          Extra     captions, labels, numerical     schematic and picto-       tones, colors, and
                    description of data             rial sign systems;         textures on data
                                                    plotting of data on X-     displays; pictorial:
                                                    Y axes, circles, other     resolution of de-
                                                    forms; depth of pic-       tails on images,
                                                    torial images              abstract to realistic

                     10                             ll                         2
                     macro-level serial and seg-    cohesion of entire         coding marks uni-
          Supra      menting devices: section       document over sev-         fying pages or sec-
                    titles, numbers; page           eral planes: page          tions of text: line
                     headers, pagination            breaks, size; location     work, color, icons,
                                                    of extra-textuals          logas, tabs
                                                    within text




          icons. Intra-textual choices, therefore, regulate thousands of points on a plane: given
          only the common variations in each coding mode cited above, the possible permuta-
          tions of our sample easily number in the thousands! Intra-textual choices can be local
           (a word in boldface) or global (a type size for an entire text), but are essentially a one-
          dimensional, point-by-point regulation of text.
               The Inter-textual level (cells 4-6) is coded primarily in the spatial mode, generat-
          ing visual cues that enable readers to search for and retrieve information. Distributed
          horizontally and vertically on an invisible two-dimensional grid, a seamless text can
          be transformed into a highly variegated system “surfacing” (Herrstrom, 1984, p. 229)
          textual structure.’ In our sample, of course, some inter-textual decisions had already
      Kostelnick   = A Systematic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication        275


been made: the movement of the text linearly to the right, the line break and contin-
uation below and to the left, the distance between lines. We can introduce numerous
other inter-textual elements to reshape the text:
    5. During the past month, our clientele in each region has increased as follows:
       e East Region, 31 clients
       ¢ South Region, 40 clients
       ¢ West Region, 25 clients

In the alphanumeric/symbolic mode (cell 4), “5.” cues us that the statement is part of
a series; headings, roman numerals, initial letters, and symbols are also serial devices.
Spatially (cell 5), the second half of the text is segmented into units and aligned ver-
tically as a list. Graphically (cell 6), bullets identify each item in the secondary series.
In more dynamic inter-textual configurations—tables, matrices, flow charts, decision
trees—spatial coding (the positioning of words and figures) creates a visual syntax,
and graphic cues (arrows, lines, geometric shapes) form a system of “macro-punctua-
tion” (Waller, 1980), among textual particles.
     The division between the inter- and extra-textual levels is subtle but perceptu-
ally and semantically critical. The two examples below can illustrate the distinction:


                   PLAN                            PLAN


Except for the spatial positioning of “PLAN,” both messages use similar visual lan-
guage. But their meanings and visual codes differ radically. On the left, the textual
particle “PLAN” (cell 5) is circumscribed graphically (cell 6), indicating one of per-
haps several functions in a decision-making process. Framed and embellished, the
word is the thing-like center of attention, like the word STOP on a road sign. The
same applies to textual particles in tables, matrices, flow charts, decision trees, and so
on: all are inter-textual arrangements, simply at a higher level of intensity than a
seamless essay. In the example on the right, however, the textual particle is merely a
tag (cell 7) identifying an image (a plan of an office, a desk, a post card) coded spa-
tially (cell 8: top view, proportional to the real thing) and graphically (cell 9: outlin-
ing the perimeter). Alternatively, the image may be nonrealistic, representing a
quantity, say the dollar amount or time in hours of generating a plan (as opposed to
other costs). In either case, textual elements assist the decoding of the message (leg-
ends, labels, captions), but information is processed primarily through seeing rather
than reading. In the right-hand example, “PLAN” is useful for decoding the message
but secondary to the visual image, which stands outside the text.
    The Extra-textual level (cells 7-9), therefore, may rely on the alphanumeric/sym-
bolic mode for interpretation, but coding is primarily spatial and graphic. Sign sys-
tems range in level of abstraction from pictorial (low level of abstraction—pho-
tographs, renderings) to schematic (high level of abstraction—logos, graphs,
diagrams; see Twyman 1979). Below, the data in our sample message are displayed
schematically:
276   Chapter 6 ®   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered          Documents




                      During the past month, our clientele in each region has increased as follows:



                                   40

                                   30

                                   20

                                   10


                                                 East       South        West



          Alphanumeric signs (cell 7) encode the X axis with geographic locations, the Y axis
          with figures; spatially (cell 8), plotting the data on the grid determines the vertical dis-
          tance between figures and the horizontal distance between regions; graphically (cell
          9), shaded bars encode the data, lines locate the axes, and tick marks gauge the scale.
          All of the coding modes are open to variation. “East” can be simplified to “E,” and fig-
          ures on the Y axis replaced by exact values above each bar. Spatially, the distances be-
          tween values and between regions can be increased or decreased, or the axis shifted 90
          degrees so the bars run horizontally. Graphically, the bars can be cross-hatched, col-
          ored, or changed to simple lines, and the tick marks replaced by a light grid.
              If the extra-textual were pictorial rather than schematic, the same                     variables
          would come into play: spatially, the image of the employees at a conference table can
          be close or distant or rotated at different angles from the real thing; graphically, it can
          be coded at a high level of realism (with plenty of surface details, down to the wood
          grain on the table) or reduced to an abstract stick drawing or a stylized logo. The cod-
          ing choices for either schematics or pictorials are interdependent: the graphic coding
          of a logo may flatten an image spatially; the spatial coding of data on a bar chart may
          restrict the range of graphic choices. Like the intra- and inter-textual levels, visual
          language at the extra-textual level depends on the contextual variables of the system.
               The Supra-textual level (cells 10-12), like the inter-textual, operates chiefly in
          the spatial mode, though on a more global scale, arranging extra-textuals (graphs, pie
          charts, pictures) within the text and regulating the flow from one page or section
          (paragraph breaks at the bottom of the page; breaks between parts of a report) to the
          next to create a coherent document. For example, in the last version of our sample,
          the spatial mode (cell 11) locates the extra-textual relative to the text (“During the
          past month. . .”): centered directly beneath the text, or to the left or to the right; or
          isolated on a separate page in close proximity or in an appendix. In the alphanumeric
          mode (cell 10), supra-textual elements include segmenting and serial devices (page
          headers, section titles, pagination); for example, I could label the bar graph in the
          sample “Figure 6,” indicating a supra-textual relation with the other extra-textuals in
          the document. In the graphic mode cohesive devices—line work, page color, logos—
          unify sections of a document, providing visual markers for readers. In our example, a
          line border around the bar chart would further demarcate the transition from text to
       Kostelnick   » A Systematic Approach   to Visual Language in Business Communication      277


extra-text. By mapping out the terrain, the supra-textual level controls the three-di-
mensional configuration of the document, enabling readers to comprehend its logic
and hierarchy and to retrieve essential information.
     Each document blends the coding modes and levels into an idiosyncratic visual
system incorporating most of the cells on the matrix. Consider the visual choices for
a simple analytical memo report. At the intra-textual level, typefaces, point sizes (cell
1), spacing (cell 2), and graphic cues (cell 3), selected from a menu of computer-gen-
erated options, create interest and emphasis and regulate the intra-linear flow of
signs. At the inter-textual level, headings (cell 4), indentation, and vertical spacing
(cell 5) structure the text, and graphic coding around textual particles (cell 6) forms
tables and matrices. At the extra-textual level, spatial coding distributes data
(monthly sales figures, production costs) on a grid (cell 8), graphic coding records
data with shaded bars (cell 9), and alphanumeric coding (cell 7) explains each vari-
able. At the supra-textual level, pages are numbered and labeled with subject, date,
author, and number (cell 10), composed spatially to locate the bar charts within the
text and to ensure continuous flow from page to page (cell 11), and coded with icons,
colors, tabs, or separate pages (blank or titled) to differentiate sections of the report
(cell 12).


age                                          ualities GR        1969). Hence, ane (eet
and coding modes are fe Paeadens The cell 1 selection of a type size, posture, and
style expands or contracts the document and therefore has supra-textual conse-
quences. Conversely, a cell 11 decision to write a “one-page resume” impinges on in-
tra- and inter-textual choices. The cell 4 decision to deploy a variety of headings may
require cell 1 assistance to establish a hierarchy. The spatial and graphic coding of a
bar chart (cells 8, 9) influence supra-textual page design. Choices for each coding
mode and level, therefore, are contingent upon other choices.
    The 12-cell matrix opens up these choices to public purview, enabling us to de-
scribe how visual elements coalesce to form coherent systems. J                 riting   sit-


                                    goals. To the extent that the oA on Ss matrix
compose an integrated system dias contributes to the purpose of the message, the
document obtains a certain level of visual sophistication or intensity.



INFORMATION DESIGN: TOWARD A
FUNCTIONAL VISUAL LANGUAGE
Of course not all visual systems succeed in eau                 the reader. What makes
visual language                                                           it, ef
278   Chapter 6 ® Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents


          visual language should    be      vals And on an idiomatic ‘and conventional level, it
          usually is: words ordinarily flow horizontally across the page; letters have signature
          blocks; bars on graphs stand for measured units. These generic conventions enable
          the reader to place visual codes into the slots of mental schemata (see Schumacher,
          1981). A one-page document that follows the conventions of a letter and arrives in
          an envelope with a booklet “fits” nicely into the slot of “cover letter,” a persuasive
          message, widely distributed, that entices the reader to examine an accompanying
          document. On the other hand, a letter set of boustrophedon (as the ox plows, back
          and forth), or horizontally across the length of the page, poses an obvious “misfit”
          most readers. By activating schemata, generic conventions foster reader expectations
          about the whole message.
              Visual conventions, however, define only general patterns, change over time and
          from one discourse community or culture to another, and may not provide the opti-
          mum visual patterns for information processing.   To compensate for these shortcom-


          search, nfCHBHOR Hes pn uponeee pea                                      ee percep-
          tion, educational and cognitive psychology, and semiotics—to discover reader-ori-
          ented visual patterns for many of the levels and coding modes on the matrix.
               From the outset, the information design movement sought to create a modern,
          rational, ideologically free system of signs accessible to a mass audience. Its intellec-
          tual roots can be traced to the functional modernism of the Bauhaus in the 20’s
          (Kinross, 1985) and indirectly to the visual dynamism of Futurist and Constructivist
          text displays. Each of these movements experimented with radically new modes of vi-
          sual design, emphasizing clean, nontraditional forms and typefaces compatible with
          Machine Age technology (see Crouwel, 1979). Together these fresh approaches to
          textual display and image-making provided an aesthetic and functional springboard
          for early information designers. For example, Neurath’s “isotype” (international sys-
          tem of picture education) symbols epitomized the quest for a rational, cross-cultural
          language of extra-textual signs for displaying quantitative data. After World War II
          the search for simple, universal, and technically precise forms continued in the in-
          vention of typeface systems, for example the serifless Univers style (Kinross, pp. 23 &
          27). On a supra-textual level, the appeal to the universal was reinforced by the laws
          of gestalt psychology (similarity, good figure, equilibrium), which transcended style
          and culture by codifying perceptual experiences detached from language or ideology.




             eorists and practitioners ¢continue to develop and test methods for functional de-
           signs. On the inter-textual level, Hartley (1985), Wright (1977), and several others
           have devised methods of employing headings, vertical spacing, and graphic cues to
           surface discourse visually, while Horn (1982) has codified these elements into a com-
           prehensive system of “structured writing.” On the extra-textual level, Tufte (1983)
           and Bertin (1981) apply functionalist principles to the visual display of quantitative
           data. Both advocate economy through density, arguing that graphs and charts should
       Kostelnick   = A Systematic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication    279


display the maximum information in the smallest space with the least ink. Bertin in-
vokes semiotic theory to define visual clarity: graphic sign systems should be “mono-
semic” (pp. 177-179), the relations among signs conveying a single, unambiguous
meaning. Consistent with its functionalist tradition, contemporary information design
theory values economy, objectivity, and semantic and structural transparency.
     Further supporting the functionalist approach are a wealth of empirical studies
aimed at identifying optimum visual displays. At the intra-textual level, Tinker (1963)
found that type sizes between 9 and 12 point maximize reading efficiency, lower case
letters are more readable than upper case, and excessive italic print reduces legibility.
On the inter-textual level, Hartley (1984) has studied, with mixed results, the effects
of horizontal and vertical structuring of text on readability, while Hartley and
Trueman (1985) have shown, through extensive experiments, that headings improve
reader performance. Wright (1968) experimented with the spatial configurations of ta-
bles, finding that users of currency conversion tables perform better with redundant
lists than with matrices. On the extra-textual level, Macdonald-Ross (1977) summa-
rized over five decades of empirical research on the graphic display of quantitative
data, concluding for example that horizontal bars are superior to unkeyed circles.
Psychologists have studied the effects of spatial depth and degree of graphic Ce in
the Eons of representative images (Perkins, 1980). oe ois tha


              At the supra-textual level, guidelines can be Hence from RE
brain research (see, for example, Welford, 1984). Because readers process visual infor-
mation more effectively in the right brain (the left field of vision),       pi

        any of the empirical findings and theoretical positions cited above presume a
universal reader performing generic, noncontextual tasks. Wright (1977) sums up the
empiricist’s dilemma: “Researchers often consider themselves free to ask if format A is
better than format B, without needing to specify better for what?” (p. 112). Some of
the findings—in particular, those of Hartley and Wright—are user-centered and tied
to specific audiences and contexts. Wright’s experiments with tabular displays are
bound to the readers’ experience with visual arrangements of figures, the situation in
which the display is used, and the readers’ familiarity with the subject. Many case
studies of public documents are contextually sensitive to the special needs posed by
audience and situation. Such studies entail pretesting and interviewing during the
design process to assure quality control and to convert visual language to a “plain
English” style intelligible to the nonspecialist    (Redish, Felker, and Rose,     1981;
Wright, 1979).
     The functional guidelines of the information design movement, therefore, spec-
ify which configurations afford the most efficient processing of information, enabling
us to engineer clear visual conduits.                        nati    rivileges functi
                       as the Bauhaus did.

                   . By melding text and form, the information design movement revo-
 utionized  the visual  language of texts and made design a bona fide part of the cre-
ative process, from planning to production.
280   Chapter 6 ®   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents




          THE MYTH OF RHETORICAL NEUTRALITY
          Ideally, information design deploys visual language to ensure an unadulterated chan-
          nel between sender and receiver. However, visual elements themselves—especially in
          business messages—obtain meaning beyond the simple transfer of information.
          “Pure’ information,” asserts Bonsiepe (1965), “exists for the designer only in arid ab-
          straction. As soon as he begins to give it concrete shape, to bring it within the range
          of experience, the process of rhetorical infiltration begins” (p. 30). Simply put, a
          “thetoric of neutrality” is a “pipe-dream,” for even the mundane visual language of a
          train timetable has a certain rhetorical force, intended or not, that affects the reader’s
          judgment (Kinross).
               This rhetorical “infiltration” stems partly from taste and cultural values. Futurist
          and Constructivist text displays, the forerunners of information design, were consid-
          ered iconoclastic when they first appeared; today they seem modern but passé. Then
          as now, they relinquish any clams to neutrality. The Machine Age modernism of the
          information design movement also constitutes a style—streamlined, simple, and low-
          key—but also subject to the vicissitudes of intellectual and aesthetic favor, and hence
          anything but “objective.”4 The invention and evolution of styles continually trans-
          form taste and perception, in art and in business communication. An early corporate
          logo, letterhead, or trademark juxtaposed to its contemporary version demonstrates
          the visual distance between past and present, and presages future recreation.
               Technology also influences the rhetoric of visual language. At the outset of the
          century most texts were handwritten in one of four styles: business, civil service, text,
          or legal. The appearance of the typewriter transformed “micro-level” (Waller, 1980)
          visual choices, forcing characters into uniform, equally spaced units on a grid and ini-
          tiating a whole new set of intra- and inter-textual conventions (Walker, 1984).
          Ninety years ago a letter done in business script would have signaled the nature of the
          message but otherwise attracted little attention. Today it would totally alter the
          rhetoric of the communication: the writer would suffer (an entry-level application
           letter) or benefit (a letter from a CEO to a consumer) from the unorthodox visual
          coding.
               Cultural and technological changes are long-term, evolutionary tendencies that
          gradually modify the shared perception of large discourse communities. The choices
          business communicators make everyday are highly contextual and vary from one au-
          dience and visual system to another. Information design can weed out perceptually
          poor choices—illegible type styles, line spacing, and data displays—but cannot nec-
          essarily prescribe rhetorically appropriate choices governing the arrangement, style,
          or tone of a particular document.
               For example, Tinker found that many common typefaces were equally legible but
          that readers preferred some faces over others. The “atmosphere value” or “semantic
          quality” of er acu 1982) opens its door to Se                          and HOSEA



           ofa pegs cananne a major impact on ae rhetoric of a message. For an informal
           message to a co-worker, a handwritten note or a dot-matrix printout reinforces the fa-
           miliar tone and transience of the document. However, a manager (one that values
      Kostelnick   = A Systematic Approach   to Visual Language in Business Communication   281


job security) submitting an annual report to a board of directors or a proposal to a
government agency will specify a typeface that projects credibility and permanence.
     Although technical capability helps, visual rhetoric is not necessarily con-
strained by available technology. Direct mail sales letters use typewritten serif styles
even though virtually any typeface could be used, given the bulk printing. Indeed, to
make messages appear more spontaneous, senders frequently underline key points
with insouciant strokes of the pen (in red ink) to personalize the visual style. Urgent
messages (e.g., collections) are customarily typed entirely in upper case, sacrificing
legibility for a more official, authoritarian tone. These choices may seem trivial and
subjective, but they are made for rhetorically sound reasons. Add to these variations
the ability to highlight text with boldface and multiple fonts and point sizes now
commonly available in desk-top printers, the business communicator will experience
far greater freedom to adapt intra-textual tone and style to the rhetorical task.
     The same holds for information design on any level of the matrix. Inter-textual
structuring—headings, vertical spacing, graphic cues—has rhetorical consequences,
surfacing certain aspects of the message while embedding others. Opening up a text
with spatial and graphic coding is equivalent to persuading visually, impelling readers
to value selected pieces of information and to acquiesce to logical and hierarchical
connections that make them cohere visually. In the second version of our sample
text, the list with bullets establishes visual parallelism among the three regions.
Perhaps the West Region is new and the writer wants to emphasize its status as a full
and equal sector. Perhaps isolating these elements argues that the vice-president for
sales is doing satisfactorily in all regions, or that by comparison the West Region is
faltering, or that more employees should be hired in the South. Depending on the
context, selective textual surfacing advances the writer’s argument. In an extremely
sensitive message (a performance appraisal), the writer may even eschew any sort of
inter-textual variation to embed key information, sacrificing legibility to maintain
rhetorical integrity.
     The third version of our sample detaches the data from the text, reshapes them
graphically, and tells the reader in a resonant voice: “Here are the facts, bare and ir-
refutable!” The visual style, bordering on hyperbole, can of course be modified.
Spatially, the bars can be extended or contracted on the grid, the graphic coding or-
namented or streamlined, the alphanumeric coding expanded—depending on the de-
signer’s argument and rhetorical stance. The differences among regions can be accen-
tuated or diminished, the graph made to appear scientific or aesthetically pleasing,
clumsy or self-serving. Any of these effects influences the reader’s impression of the
data as well as of the author’s integrity and is far from neutral. Even acquiescing to
someone else’s configuration of the data is still to choose, and the reader to receive,
the visual rhetoric of the message.
     Together these choices coalesce to drive the visual rhetoric of the document.
Consider the range of visual decisions that go into an annual report to stockholders:
the company logo, charts and graphs to display sales and production figures; a plan
and line drawing of a new plant; photographs introducing board members; and tex-
tual displays of expenses, revenues, and earnings. Along with these are numerous
supra-textual decisions regarding the location of extra-textuals, the size and number
of pages, and graphic cues such as color and line work intended to coordinate the
whole document, add interest to complex data, instill confidence in investors, and
282   Chapter 6 #   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          accurately project the company’s image (innovative, consumer oriented, high-tech).
          The visual system is both informational and persuasive, enabling investors to locate
          pertinent facts and, more importantly, enabling the company to market its perfor-
          mance. Although annual reports are more complex than everyday messages, main-
          taining full rhetorical control over any business document requires careful visual
          planning. In other words, the writer must attend to the visual system during the com-
          posing process as rhetorical strategies take shape.



          COORDINATING VISUAL AND VERBAL
          RHETORIC: A HOLISTIC PROCESS
                                                     st       ess” (Barton & Barton, 1985) in
                                                    comp ement, and compensate for one an-
          other to accomplish the rhetorical goals st the communication. Linguistic invention
          entails innumerable lexical choices; visual invention Eee from the wealth of


          arrang                          9 on. Burne the planning stage of a deat eey a
          proposa persuading a skeptical reader to act on a recommendation—the visual
          thetorician considers several options:

               ¢ Stimulate reader interest through a logo, picture, or data display (cells 8, 9) and
                 through highly variegated inter-textual structure (cells 4, 5, 6).
               e Surface selected arguments and benefits through intra- and inter-textual varia-
                 tions (cell 1: boldfacing and all capitals; cell 3: underlining; cell 6: bullets to
                 highlight items in a list).
               e Adapt the style of data displays (cells 8-9) to a nonspecialist (cell 7 alphanu-
                 meric coding), and project a serious tone necessary to engage this reader (cell 1
                 choice of a typeface; cells 6, 9, 12 graphic coding).
               ¢ Map out the document with inter- and supra-textual cues (cells 4-6, 10-12)
                 that guide the busy reader through the information, increasing readability.

               Because these and many other strategies apply to visual as well as verbal problem-
          solving, early planning synchronizes the two from the start.
               Early planning also exploits the special rhetorical capabilities of the visual and the
          verbal. For example, a bar graph can often argue with statistics more clearly and em-
          phatically than inter-textual displays of figures; a logo can establish the identity of an
          organization or a project more succinctly and forcefully than an explanatory paragraph.
          On the other hand, in a sales letter a poetic description of the scenery at a resort may be
          more provocative than a high resolution photograph, and in a negative recommenda-
          tion letter a seamless text more tactful than one that is visually transparent.
               Because the visual and verbal are interdependent, holistic planning enables the
          writer-designer to monitor the interaction between the two. A highly variegated inter-
          textual system changes sentence structure and syntax, increasing the frequency of paral-
          lelism and fragments and eliminating the need for verbal transitions (Bernhardt, 1986).
          Converting text-bound figures to a data display (as in the third version of our example)
       Kostelnick   » A Systematic Approach to Visual Language in Business Communication              283


contracts and reshapes the text. On the other hand, a complex line graph may require
textual expansion to highlight and explain key data. Style and tone are also interactive:
a set of informally written instructions on how to pot plants calls for simple line draw-
ings, instead of photographs, to illustrate the task; the linguistic tone of a sales letter
theme or slogan sets the visual tone for images on the envelope and enclosures.
     Globally, supra-textual decisions can regulate the linguistic evolution of the text.
Thing-like, the page is a tablet, the writer’s unit of workspace, like an artist’s canvas,
an architect’s story, or a sculptor’s marble slab. The tablet as visual workspace both
complicates and simplifies the writer’s task. Some undergraduates struggle to find
enough material to fill up a “one-page” résumé, while others try desperately to con-
flate several pages into one. As items are arranged on the tablet, the writer strikes a
balance between the functional exigencies of information design (the user may give
the document only a cursory glance) and an appropriate rhetorical stance—the need
to appear trustworthy, ambitious, successful, and employable. To these ends, elements
are moved about, sha           ut              inguistically (in phrases and fragments).


       isual design, like writing, is a process of discovery. This discovery process occurs
within and outside the text. Articulating a text with intra- and inter-textual cues—
typographical variations, paragraph breaks, headings, lists, tables—unfolds and struc-
tures ideas, enabling the writer to resee the logic of the message. Creating visual clar-
ity demands clear thinking, and rethinking, about content (Hartley, 1984, p. 502).
Extra-textuals also act as discovery tools (Bertin, 1981). The process of translating
data into a visual sign system surfaces patterns and relationships submerged in a table
of figures. This happens rudimentarily in the third version of our example: the de-
signer must experiment with graphic and spatial coding to find a rhetorically suitable
configuration. If we had additional figures—abut client increases in previous periods,
the clients themselves (individuals, businesses, government agencies), or dollar vol-
umes per client or region—permuting these data on the X-Y axes would enable us to
find an insightful pattern. Supple and unpredictable, data displays are powerful dis-
covery tools, much like freewriting, zero drafting, and outlining.

                         un      5San evolutionary   process   entailing        vention,   revision
                                                                O          SV


                                                      ix.   However, if these elements are to
be transformed into inventive patterns, they must be treated as bona fide rhetorical
tools guided by the same strategies that govern the linguistic text. Asserting complete




CONCLUSION
Business communication is intensely visual: as practitioners, researchers, and instructors
we are inundated with an array of visible forms. Although we use, teach, and presumably
value effective visual language, we have no system for describing, analyzing, or evaluat-
ing it. This is partially because design is viewed as a ready-made set of conventions or as
284   Chapter 6 ®    Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          a task performed by specialists—in either case extrinsic to the writing process. However,
          in the making of business documents, writing and designing, reading and seeing, are in-
          terdependent, complementing and impinging on each other to satisfy the goals of the
          communication. Combined in any business document, the three coding modes and four
          levels of visual language comprise an integrated system enabling the reader to process in-
          formation efficiently from the rhetorical perspective the writer intends. Adapting the vi-
          sual system to the message is essential in business communication because audience and
          purpose vary from one message to another and because writers have the autonomy to de-
          sign their own documents.
               Successful adaptation requires attention to design throughout the writing
          process. We have only rudimentary knowledge about how visual and verbal thinking
          interact during this process or how the contextual variables of visual language affect
          readers. What we do know, instinctively though perhaps unconsciously as members of
          a “print culture,” is that visual thinking is intrinsic to the discovery and communica-
          tion of meaning. To use visual language fluently, or to understand its structure and
          nuances, we must explore it explicitly and systematically, with the same rigorous
          scrutiny given the linguistic text.

          Notes
                  1. Twyman (1979) has proposed a graphic schema containing four modes of symboliza-
              tion and seven methods of configuration. His matrix contains twenty-eight “cells” and
              classifies primarily spatial variations at the inter- and extra-textual levels.
                  2. Some of Twyman’s methods of configuration are particularly relevant here: Pure lin-
              ear (a continuous flowing text; e.g., in circular form), Linear interrupted (conventional
              text with line breaks), List, Matrix (tables), and Linear branching (a tree, an organiza-
              tional chart).
                  3. Design guidelines derived from hemispheric research are contingent upon at least
              two variables: the kind of information processing required by the task (part-by-part vs.
              holistic analysis) and the amount of verbal thinking the viewer is doing at the time.
                    4. See Kinross for a detailed account of the aesthetic and ideological evolution of the
              information design movement and its claims to rhetorical “neutrality.”
                  5. The “atmosphere value” of typefaces has long been the subject of study and specula-
              tion. For example, Ovink experimented with several typefaces used in literature and ad-
              vertising, grouping their subjective effects under categories such as “luxury/refinement,”
              “economy/precision,” and “strength.” But the moods and cultural values associated with
              intra-textual styles can change dramatically: serifless letter forms, which are typically al-
              lied with modernism, were initially revived in the eighteenth century because they
              evoked “rugged antiquity” (Spencer, 1969, pp. 29-30).


          References
              Arnheim,      Rudolf (1969). Visual thinking. Berkeley, CA: University of California
                 Press.
               Barton, Ben E & Barton, Marthalee S. (1985). Toward a rhetoric of visuals for the
                  computer era. The Technical Writing Teacher, 12, 126-145.
               Bartram, David (1982). The perception of semantic quality in type: Differences be-
                  tween designers and nondesigners. Information Design Journal, 3, 38-50.
  Kostelnick    = A Systematic Approach      to Visual Language in Business Communication          285


Bernhardt,     Stephen     A.   (1986).   Seeing   the    text.    College   Composition     and
   Communication, 37, 66-78.
Bertin, Jacques (1981). Graphics and graphic information-processing (William J. Berg
   and Paul Scott, Trans.). New York: De Gruyter.
Bonsiepe, Gui (1965). Visual/verbal rhetoric. Ulm, 14-16, 23-40.
Crouwel, Wim (1979). Typography: A technique of making a text ‘legible.’ In Paul
   Kolers,   Merald   E. Wrolstad,    and Herman      Bouma       (Eds.), Processing of Visible
   Language, (1, pp. 151-164). New York: Plenum.
Gelb, I. J. (1980). Principles of writing systems within the frame of visual communi-
   cation. In Kolers, Wrolstad, and Bouma (2: pp. 7-24).
Hartley, James (1985). Designing instructional text      (2nd ed.). New York: Nichols.
Hartley, James (1984). Space and structure in instructional text. In Ronald Easterby
   and Harm Zwaga (Eds.), Information design (pp. 497-515). New York: Wiley.
Hartely, James & Trueman, Mark (1985). A research strategy for text designers: The
   role of headings. Instructional Science, 14, 99-155.
Herrstrom, David Sten (1984). Technical writing as mapping description onto dia-
   gram: The graphic paradigms of explanation. Journal of Technical Writing and
   Communication,     14, 223-240.
Horn, Robert E. (1982). Structured writing and text design. In David H. Jonassen
   (Ed.), The technology of text (pp. 341-365). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational
   Technology Publications.
Kinross, Robin (1985). The rhetoric of neutrality. Design Issues, 2(2), 18-30.
Macdonald-Ross, Michael (1977). How numbers are shown: A review of research on
   the presentation      of quantitative data in texts. AV Communication           Review,   25,
   359-409.
Ong, Walter (1982). Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word. New York:
   Methuen.
Perkins, D. N. (1980). Pictures and the real thing. In Kolers, Wrolstad, and Bouma
   (2, pp. 259-278).
Redish, Janice C., Felker, Daniel B., & Rose, Andrew M. (1981). Evaluating the ef-
   fects of document design principles. Information Design Journal, 2, 236-243.
Schumacher, Gary M. (1981). Schemata in text processing and design. Information
   Design Journal, 2, 17-27.
Spencer, Herbert (1969). The visible word (2nd ed.). New York: Hastings.
Tinker, Miles (1963). Legibility of print. Ames, [A: lowa State University Press.
Tufte, Edward (1983). The visual display of quantitative information. Cheshire, CT:
   Graphics Press.
Twyman, Michael (1979). A schema for the study of graphic language. In Kolers,
   Wrolstad, and Bouma (1, pp. 117-150).
Walker, Sue (1984). How typewriters changed correspondence: An analysis of pre-
   scription and practice. Visible Language, 18, 102-117.
Waller, Robert H. W. (1980). Graphic aspects of complex texts: Typography as
   macro-punctuation. In Kolers, Wrolstad, and Bouma (2, pp. 241-253).
Welford, A. T. (1984). Theory and application in visual displays. In Easterby and
   Zwaga (pp. 3-18).
286   Chapter 6 =      Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



              Wright, Patricia (1979). The quality control of document design. Information Design
                 Journal, 1, 33-42.
              Wright, Patricia (1977). Presenting technical information: A survey of research find-
                 ings. Instructional Science, 6, 93-134.
              Wright, Patricia (1968). Using tabulated information. Ergonomics, 11, 331-343.

          DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
            1. Explain what Kostelnick means when he argues that visual communication has remained
               “confined to a superficial or decorative rather than a functional or rhetorical role in the
               communicative process.” Support your explanation with examples you have located, and
               be prepared to discuss your response and share your examples in class (bring your ex-
               amples in electronic, transparent, or print-copied versions, depending on the technolo-
               gies available in your classroom).
            2. Locate a one-page document and analyze its use of visual language using cells one thru
               nine of the twelve-cell schema. Be prepared to discuss in class your analysis of any of the
               nine cells (bring your document example to class in either electronic, transparent, or
               print-copied versions, depending on the technologies available in your classroom).
            3. Kostelnick argues that visual language cannot be rhetorically neutral, and yet the informa-
               tion design movement retains some sense that visual language can be rhetorically neu-
               tral. Argue why you believe information design/visual language can or cannot be rhetori-
               cally neutral. Support your position with examples.
            4. Towards the end of his article, Kostelnick begins using a hyphenated “writer-designer”
               designation to designate the professional writer. Define the writer-designer’s work (e.g.,
               work she must attend to, her writing process, who she works with, and her final product)
               by contrasting it with the non-hyphenated writer's and designer's work.




             Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
             Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
             lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
             in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
             the field itself.
             1. text
             2. artifact
             3. system-centered approach
             4. user-friendly approach
             5. user-centered approach
             6. readability
             7. iterative design
                                                        Johnson      #* When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions         287



    WHEN ALL ELseE Fats, USE THE
    INSTRUCTIONS: LOCAL KNOWLEDGE,
    NEGOTIATION, AND THE CONSTRUCTION
    OF USER-CENTERED COMPUTER
    DOCUMENTATION
    ROBERT ‘iJOHNSON

         Consider the “stop print” function in some database programs. You make a
         mistake or you see that it’s not printing the way you want and you want to
         kill it. So you quickly open the manual under “print” and look for “stop” and
         there is nothing. So you look under “k” for “kill”; you even look under “a” for
         “annihilate.” And there is nothing in the index that tells you how to hike
         the darned thing stop.
               There should be a law: ET                           pre «oro
                                  . I call this law: “No one should be allowed to
         make menus who hasn’t had to eat off them.”
                                                             —Ellen Bravo, 9 to 5



U: of technologies, at one time or another, use some form of written instruc-
     tions to help guide them through the “correct” procedure of whatever artifact
they are currently using. Whether we are putting together a barbeque, repairing a bi-
cycle, tuning a car, or following the directions for taking a medical prescription, we
often are compelled to consult the instructions: the texts! that contain the knowl-
edge of what it is that                                                               ut
                                                                           . Early stud-
ies of how people comprehend warnin        ns (see Chapanis aes sate ase Ss
cated that                                    5                                   :
More recent investigations have demonstrated that the bref om oneal cremareet
included on drug prescriptions often is not followed correctly, thus leading to possible
medical complications and potential lawsuits (Williams, et. al. 1995). Clearly, despite
their ubiquity, written instructions have something less than a glowing reputation.
     Nevertheless, as much as we may try to avoid them, we simply cannot escape the
presence of instructional texts in our everyday lives. In some instances, such as those
involving computer technology, we might not actively seek instructional assistance

Source: Reprinted by permission from User-Centered Technology: A Rhetorical Theory for Computers and Other Mundane
Artifacts by Robert R. Johnson, the State University of New York Press © 1998, State University of New York. All rights
reserved.”

  | In this chapter's discussion of instructional documents, “texts” will be used as broadly as possible: printed
pages, on-line screen information, medicine bottle labels, road signs, explanatory cartoons—anywhere instruc-
tional material might reside.
288   Chapter 6    =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          but it is offered to us anyway. For example, I unexpectedly received the following
          message while loading a new piece of software on my personal computer:


                                              The application “unknown” has
                                              unexpectedly quit, beceuse an error of
                                               type 15 occurred.




          Unless I am a super user of the system, or I happen to have an up-to-date definitive
          reference document explaining all of the error messages of the operating system,
          there is little useful information contained in this computer displayed “dialogue
          box.”? It provides no visible knowledge of why the system stopped working or what
          the error might be. Was it my error or the system’s error? Am I compelled to agree
          with the machine and just commit myself to agreeing that everything is “OK”? As the
          authoritative upraised hand might suggest, am I to fear that by choosing “OK” I
          might be harming the machine or the software? Above all else, if ] attempt the proce-
          dure again (which | did), and I receive the same message again (which | did), what
           am I supposed to do?
                Instructional materials have more far-reaching consequences than merely frus-
           trating or confounding a user. James Paradis’s study of the litigation that surrounded
           the operating manual for a direct-acting stud gun is but one example of the legal ram-
           ifications of written procedures (1991). Such discussions of the legal issues associated
           with instructions have given me pause as I have gleaned numerous documentation
           over the course of my research. Possibly the most frightening example was the proce-
           dure for cleaning a rifle. In the fourth step of the procedure a warning (all in upper
           case letters) stated:
                  4. NEVER WORK ON A LOADED GUN!

           It appears that the authors of these instruction assumed the user would make it to
           step 4—a deadly assumption, given the context.
                Curiously, with the vast number of texts dedicated to instructing humans how to
           do, the potential legal problems surrounding them, and the significant effort that sev-
           eral disciplines have devoted to the study of instructional materials, it is ironic that
           the reputation of these texts remains so dismal. Try to remember the last time you
           heard someone say, “Wow! Those were really fantastic instructions!” Chances are you
           can not recall such a statement, and if you can then it was probably pure sarcasm.
           Why have instructions received such a “bum rap?” Why are they used only when “all
           else fails”? Why do instructions seemingly fail to do what they are supposed to do—
           instruct humans on how to use technologies?


            2 The term dialogue box is curious in that it actually represents a monologue presented through the computer.
           Probably this terminology occurred because the computer has been characterized as an intelligent machine that
           communicates with people. At the same time, it also appears to be a reflection of a false sense of the reality of
           human-computer interaction, discussed in chapter 4.
                                                       Johnson   *   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions    289


     Part of the difficulty with instructional materials is due to their deceptive simplic-
ity. Instructions are meant to make the assembly or use of an artifact appear simple:
they are a masking device for the complexity of systems and artifacts. Instructions are
expected, as the renaissance courtier would have said, to possess Spretzaturra—the abil-
ity to make the difficult arn mundane. Phi
                                                                          2    Seager   4%       .

                                                        Ironically, the apparent ease of
useErie the texts ditplay makes the Geenietenal documents themselves look “easy.”
They look simple, so they must be simple to write (and simple to use, thus invoking
the image of “idiot-proofing,” discussed in chapter 3).
      Further, instructional documents are what visibly reside between the user and the
black box of technology. Therefore, they play the role of messenger in the transfer of
the technology to the user and are more apt to be blamed for any breakdowns that oc-
cur during use because they are present at the moment of frustration or breakdown.
As such, instructions are intruders into users’ spaces. Humans have a proclivity to ap-
proach technologies without instructions in hand (literally). We have a strong desire
to “get going” when we are using new artifacts, and instructional texts only intrude
on our mission. Technologies are means to our ends, after all, and the activity of using
instructions can be an additional barrier to achieving our goal. That is, when we use a
technology we are too busy trying to figure out how the artifact can help us obtain our
goal, and the instructional document that accompanies the artifact is perceived as a
time-consuming nuisance.
    Perhaps, as commonly uae the poor reputation of instructions canEs
be blamed ¢on bad writing.                      ons te    0ks       aim

         ons. The evidence is £00. strong, however, to blame t                                            writ-
                                  +m     of unusable      instructions. As I mentioned at the opening
of this chapter, readers cann often comprehend the syntactic structure of the vocabu-
lary used in instructional materials, but they cannot complete the intended actions
that the instructions are meant to support.
     Indeed, the aforementioned problems contribute to the difficulties we have with
instructional documents. However, as accurate as these complaints may be, they do
not actively address the fundamental end of usable documentation: the use of tech-
nology by users.? Instructions have been written with the artifact or system (or the
marketing of the artifact or system) as the focus, and the end of written instructions
has thus been to merely describe the “thingness” or sleekness of artifacts and systems
instead of their situated use. There is, in short, a deeply imbedded assumption that instruc-
tional materials are adequate merely because the information is there in either print or on-
line form. Never mind where or how the instructions will be used, this assumption
dictates; the fact that users have a text in front of them is enough. Ironically, almost
insidiously, this assumption places virtually the entire burden of comprehending in-
structional text on the user.
     For instance, in a recent study of medical patients, it was concluded that there is
something akin to a literacy “epidemic” in regard to the information with which peo-

 3 Here I am referring to the “end” of technology as being in the user—see chapter 2 for an elaboration on this
concept.
290   Chapter 6   =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          ple are provided as they seek medical care. When patients ‘at two large urban hospitals
          were studied concerning their ability to comprehend written materials provided by
          medical personnel, it was concluded that many patients suffered from “inadequate
          functional health literacy” (Williams, et. al., p. 1677). As the researchers explain,
          “Functional literacy is the ability to use reading, writing, and computational skills at a
          level adequate to meet the need of everyday situations. Functional literacy varies by
          context and setting; the skills of a patient may be adequate at home or work, but mar-
          ginal or inadequate in the health care setting” (pp. 1677-78). In the study, they found
          that patients had difficulty comprehending, remembering, or acting upon medical in-
          formation contained on such things as appointment slips, birth control instructions,
          prescription dosage information, and consent forms. With the exception of the con-
          sent forms, which the researchers admit are difficult to read due to legal concerns re-
          garding malpractice (see p. 1681), the study contends that most of the documents used
          in the study are simple texts that are written at or below a sixth-grade comprehension
          level. In other words, the assumption here is that regardless of context (even though
          these authors seem to admit the problem of context in their aforementioned definition
          of functional literacy) the “medically illiterate” are just plain unable to read and write.
          I guess the same can be said of the “computer illiterate,” who cannot understand sim-
          ple texts like the error message shown on page 288. The information from within the
          medical black box is made visible, but those who cannot comprehend it are illiterate.
          Heaven forbid that the system should be changed to expose the black box! The
          knowledge of the Sa is assumed to be correct in the ae Steiner Inaddi-


               “User cere is ihe AR ERANE logan Theeuser is relegated to the position of a
          one-way receiver who has little knowledge of the technology itself or how the tech-
          nological system might be refigured through an active negotiation of designers, pro-
          ducers, and users. Instead, the situated activities associated with use are supplanted in
          favor of the static, correct description of technology, ala the knowledge of the “expert”
          who designed and developed the artifact. Thus instructional materials have, inno-
          cently or not, played a significant role in the continuation of the modern technology
          myth that the role of experts is to invent, while the role of novices is to await, with
          baited breath, the perfectly designed artifact. The complicity of instructional docu-
          ments with this top-down, expert-to-novice ideology has a number of crucial ramifi-
          cations that have been mentioned in previous chapters regarding the determinist
          tendencies of technology development, the perception of users as “idiots,” and the
           use of the word “human” in technology development to give credence to technology-
           driven initiatives. Most obviously, a disproportionate binary is created that at once
           empowers the developers and disseminators of technology while it disempowers the
           users who receive the technologies at the end of the production cycle. In this chapter,
           I will argue that Fragomen                      benmnecenaferbensladsaainal
          ogy development process. While this in itself is not a revolutionary claim, the conse-
           quences of this arrangement are substantial.


               I have chosen computer documentation as an example of instructional text de-
           velopment for several reasons. First, the problems associated with instructional text
                                                   Johnson     ® When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions     291


have been magnified as a result of the personal computer. The computer has emerged
into our culture through numerous contexts, many of which include people who have
had no previous experience with computer technology. Even though these users may
be highly educated, they received little, if any, formal instruction concerning com-
puters in their traditional educational experience. Consequently, computer docu-
mentation has become the primary vehicle for educating this wide variety of users
about this rapidly developing technology.
     Second, computer documentation resides in more than one medium (print and
on-line forms), and thus further complicates the challenge of user-centered theory.
Such multiple media involvement opens doors to a number of fascinating and funda-
mental questions of reading, writing, text design, human comprehension, and the
concept of self, to name only a few. In particular, the differences in media illuminate
problems with traditional instructional genres. As we shall see later, traditional gen-
res often do not address the needs of users in the ever-changing contexts of computer-
mediated media.
     Third, computer documentation writing is arguably the largest source of employ-
ment presently for technical communicators. This in itself offers more than one rea-
son to seriously pursue computer documentation as it brings to the front questions re-
garding the practice of writing, the role of writers in industry, and even the position
of power that technical communicators hold in institutional settings. For instance,
technical and scientific writers have traditionally been defined by the discipline they
work within—such as medicine, environmental science, industrial technology, and
so on. The computer, however, complicates these divisions as many writers now per-
form functions that were once primarily within the jurisdiction of the computer doc-
umentation specialist. Most technical and scientific writers, regardless of their spe-
cialty, write computer-related instructional materials in print and on-line forms
because their audiences are increasingly using the computer medium as a text.
     Fourth, computer documentation is a marginalized text in the sphere of academic
research. By that, I mean it has seldom received the serious theoretical, historical, or
general scholarly attention that many other forms of texts have received.* Here I am
not just including literary texts (like novels, poems, short stories, diaries, essays, etc.)
as the favored sites of analysis, but | also include scientific articles, laboratory reports,
legal documents, and grant proposals. These texts have been given rigorous attention
at one time or another by scholars in a variety of disciplines.» Computer documenta-
tion is one of the most complicated forms of text we possess—both in terms of prod-
uct and process. It simply deserves a serious analysis apart from the usual “applied”
discussions that usually revolve around it.®
     Finally, computer user documentation is a valuable lens, not only for the study of
the texts themselves but also for studying the users who use them and the constituent

4 The most notable exceptions are studies like Stephen Doheny-Farina’s or Roger Grice’s about documenta-
tion processes in industry settings.
 5 A short list of work done with these other forms of “nonliterary” texts would include Greg Myers’ Writing
Biology, Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar’s Laboratory Life, Bazerman’s Shaping Written Knowledge, Yates’
Control Through Communication, Dorothy Winsors’ (and others) work on the Challenger disaster.
 6 Apart from the practical discussions of writing computer documentation, most research using computer doc-
umentation as a textual “site” has employed it in the service of explaining visual presentation of text (see
Kalmbach or Koselnick), or as a model of products that exemplify usability methods (see Dumas and Redish).
292   Chapter 6    =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          cultures’ that arise/evolve from the activities associated with computer technology. It
          is, in fact, the social arrangements and processes of computer documentation devel-
          opment that will provide much of the focus for the upcoming discussion.


                In this section, three approaches to computer documentation development will
          be discussed: system-centered,             user-friendly, and user-centered. These three terms
          have been borrowed from various places, but the use of them as a taxonomic device
          to describe computer documentation development processes is my own invention.
          Therefore, a definition of each term as it applies to the current discussion of computer
          documentation theory will be provided here.


          ARTIFACTS, EXPERTS, AND IDIOTS: THE SYSTEM-CENTERED
          VIEW OF COMPUTER DOCUMENTATION
          This view of computer system development has dominated the field of computer sci-
          ence for many years, and it has driven much of the technological development that
          computer systems have enjoyed in recent years. The reality that computer systems
          and applications need user documentation, however, has sprung from the recent phe-
          nomenon of the microcomputer and the proliferation of end users. System-centered
          design practices, in contrast, have evolved from an earlier time in computer technol-
          ogy where users were experts in the use of the systems, thus had little need for in-
          structional texts in computer usage.
                  Documentation        that was developed from these system-centered practices was
          aimed more at the static description of the computer’s components and features than
          it was at any kind of end use of the computer. A now classic example of this is the
          huge library of documentation that accompanies UNIX, an operating system for
          mainframe computers. The documentation for UNIX (both its print library and its
          cryptic on-line commands and error messages) has been designed from a system-cen-
          tered perspective that assumes more than a casual familiarity with UNIX. The major
          sections of Volume 1 of the UNIX documentation (see Figure 6.1) depict the system-
          centered focus on system features instead of user tasks. The documentation in the sys-
          tem-centered approach, as exemplified by the UNIX system, is a literal documenting
          of the static system: a description of the system’s features removed from any context


                                                  1. Commands
                                                  2. System calls
                                                  3. Subroutines
                                                  4. Special files
                                                  5. File formats and conventions

                                              Figure 6.1.    Section headings of a UNIX
                                              manual.

            7 “Culture” is used broadly here to mean any community that might have common bonds due to context or
           practice: that is, workplace cultures, classroom cultures, and even electronic cultures such as those emerging
           from the use of the Internet or other computer networked arrangements.
                                             Johnson      #   When Ail Else Fails, Use the Instructions   293




                                               The
                                          Documentation




                                           The Designer




                                              Image of
                                            the System


                                              image of
                                            the System




     Figure 6.2.   The system-centered view of computer documentation.




of use. The issue of where the computer will be used, who will use it, and for what
purpose(s) it will be used is assumed in the system-centered view. A consequence of
this approach for user documentation has been to place user documentation far from
the center of system development (see Figure ¢ 6.2),
     = ipicenenenecntilensareineatiGra Ia the needs of the technological system at
  e                e system as the source of all knowledge pertaining to the de-
velopment of
           documentation (as the arrow indicates). This view assumes that it is
not only focal, but that the system exists before any documentation exists. There is
no need for the user to have an impact on the central concerns of system develop-
ment, this black box perspective of technology suggests, because the system is too
complex and therefore should be designed and developed by experts who know what
is most appropriate in the system design. The image that radiates from the system and
eventually finds its way into the documentation, then, is an image that is envisioned
by the system designer. Consequently, it is commonplace in system-centered com-
                                                                        to memorize com-
puter designs to find cryptic error messages, long strings of difficult
294   Chapter 6   ®   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          mands, and system components hidden from the interface that could prove poten-
          tially helpful to the uninitiated user.
               From this designer’s image follows the documentation image of the system. Here the
          documentation is written (often by the designers themselves, at least in draft form) to
          reflect what the designer views as the important components of the system. A com-
          mon practice in this documentation development process is for writers to collect the
          “knowledge” of the system from the designers through notes written by the designers,
          or in interviews conducted by the writers. Consequently, the documentation is writ-
          ten to reflect the image of the system designer (refer to Figure 2.1 for an earlier de-
          scription of the general system-centered process). The user, then, far removed from
          the central concerns of the system design, receives documentation that contains a
          system designer’s image of the system.
               I should explain that there are few published advocates of a system-centered ap-
          proach to computer documentation, at least among professional writers.8 Most tech-
          nical communicators who write computer documentation are concerned with the
          needs of their audience—users—and therefore would not advocate a view of docu-
          mentation development that places the user on the periphery. Unfortunately, techni-
          cal communicators are often forced to be part of the system-centered approach be-
          cause it is mandated (consciously or unconsciously) by the institution or organization
          they work within. Consequently, technical communicators write documentation at
          the end of the system development process and have little choice but to create sys-
          tem-centered documents.
              Caught in a loop of technological determinism, system-centered documentation
          reflects the system designers’ description of the system’s features and its anticipated ac-
          tions. The users’ views of the system are irrelevant because they are not only figuratively
          but literally removed from the system development process. System-centered computer
          documentation has been viewed by developers as a necessary evil that must be created
          for the “idiots” who cannot figure out the system through their previous knowledge or
          trial and error. Put simply, system-centered documentation is the result of the deeply
          embedded dominance of system-centered philosophy in the world of computer technol-
          ogy development—a view that is far moretechnologically
                                                        than humanly driven.


          TEXTS, READERS, AND “REALITY”: THE USER-FRIENDLY
          VIEW OF COMPUTER DOCUMENTATION
           User-friendly is a term that has been applied to technology usage in general (see chap-
          ter 2). In terms of computer technology, it refers to a computer product that has been
          Rae as an attempt to fit the product to the background and expectations of the
           on                iliar icons on the screen to replace strings of commands, the advent of
                  uter screens that looklike
                                           the actual printed page (“what-you-see-is-what-you-


            8 One published example of a system-centered approach to documentation is Mastering Documentation by
           Paula Bell and Charlotte Evans. Most system-centered documentation is produced in-house (and thus propri-
           etary) with little or no published material explaining the process. The main evidence of the system-centered
           process remains the textual evidence it produces, like the UNIX manuals discussed previously.
                                                      Johnson      # When Ail Else Fails, Use the Instructions     295


get”), and the development of hand-operated pointer devices (i.e.mua                                       dy A
teplage mostactionsdepe through a keyboard are a few examples of                                   how computer.
interface designers have begun to make computers more accessible to a larger number
of t
     The user-friendly approach to documentation development is characterized by
an emphasis on the clarity of the verbal text, close attention to structured page de-
sign, copious use of visuals (often computer “screen shots”), and a warm, sometimes
even excited tone that “invites” the user to enjoy learning the new computer system
or software application. On a spectrum that places the system-centered computer
 documentation         view on one end and user-centered views on the other, the user-
friendly view would be in the middle, although intruth it is ¢            the user-cen-
ceugeegess This view has more interest in the user than the system-centered view,
undoubtedly it has improved the quality of user documents to a great degree. The
user-friendly view, however, still assumes that the design of computer systems is pri-
marily the charge of the system designers and developers. That is, the system is as-
sumed to be complete in the user-friendly approach, and user-friendly documentation
is viewed as the vehicle for carrying the “reality” of the system image to the user.
Therefore, user-frien                   dly has most often focused on the ver-
                          computer documentation
bal and visual quality of texts that support the descriptionofthe system and the read-
ability? of the text itself (see Figure 6.3).
      The user-friendly approach is largely an outgrowth of the intensive work that has
been carried out in recent years pertaining to document design and readability.
During the past two decades, document design researchers have argued that docu-
mentation should be designed in accordance with a process model of document de-
sign (Felker, 1981), and that the functional nature of the texts should be accounted
for through careful structuring of their verbal and visual elements. From this perspec-
tive, the user-friendly development process begins approximately at the same stage of
the system development represented by the third ring of the system-centered view in
Figure 6.2: the documentation, or text, image. Consequently, the user-friendly devel-
opment process concentrates almost solely on text that has been written in accor-
dance with the system designer’s view of the system where there is little or no early
user analysis before the documents are drafted. Most of these approaches also lean
heavily on the traditional genres of user documentation, such as tutorials, user guides,
reference guides, on-line help, computer-based training, and so on. This focus on text
is clearly evident in most of the computer documentation textbooks currently on the
market (Grimm 1984; Price 1993; Brockman 1991; Weiss 1991; Price and Korman
1993; Low, et. al. 1994),10



 9T use the term readability in a strict sense, indicating the use of formal measures of determining the quality
and comprehensibility of text, such as the Gunning Fog Index or Cloze tests.
10 [ do not mean to imply that these texts completely ignore the user. Nearly all of the prominent how-to books
for computer documentation writing include chapters devoted to methods of audience analysis or to brief dis-
cussions of user testing. The audience analysis methods, however, are usually of the “audience invoked” variety
(see Ede and Lunsford 1984), which calls for a writer to imagine the needs of the user. User testing is most
often presented in a late chapter as a way to test already drafted documents.
296   Chapter 6 = Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents




                                                        The
                                                   Verbal/Visual



                                                        The
                                                    Readability




                                                     Design of
                                                      the Text




               Figure 6.3. The user-friendly view of computer documentation.




                Radiating from this central concern of the text lies the readability of the text.
           The user-friendly approach emphasizes the importance of reader comprehension and
           learning and often advocates either readability measures or the results of previous
           readability tests to measure the validity of the texts that they are developing (see
           Duffy 1985 or Duin 1989). Great importance is placed on the coordination between
           the verbal and visual elements of user documents (as seen in the third ring of the
           user-friendly view, Figure 6.3). The integration of text and graphic is certainly not
           new to technical communication, as some of the earliest general technical writing
           textbooks spent considerable time on this practice (see, for instance, Mills and
           Walter 1978; Lannon 1997), and it has been the source of much important scholarly
           work in recent years (see Barton and Barton 1989; Tufte 1983; Killingsworth and
           Sanders 1988).
                Finally, the fourth ring of the user-friendly view attempts to account for the user
           as a reader who is situated in a particular occasion of text usage: readers who have
           particular needs that can be fulfilled by documents designed to meet that occasion.
                                                Johnson     #   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   297


Traditionally, the situation of the reader has been defined in terms of learning or
doing,!! and the texts that result from this interpretation of the user’s situation fall
into two categories: those that support learning (i.e., print genres of tutorials, user
guides; on-line genres of computer-aided training or ERO} and those that support
doing (i-e., print genres of teference and quick reference; on-line genres like “Help”).
     The meena approach has many advantages over the system-centered view,
due to its focus on visual design and the needs of the user as reader: differences that
have greatly improved the textual quality and user reception of computer user docu-
ments. The approach is a natural outcome of the historical movement toward creat-
ing more usable texts. It does, however, have at least two chief drawbacks when ap-
plied to computer documents. To begin, because                       D >ach isbased onreading, it
focuses on how well readers comprehend and fol ow                     printed text. Readability re-
search has become closely linked to the quality of ee          and thus focuses on the
comprehensibility, organization, coherence, and audience appropriateness of the
texts’ verbal content (see Duin 1989). This limits the results of such research to pri-
marily the verbal elements of the text. Some researchers have expanded this view to
encompass the use of visuals in user documents (Redish 1988), but most have con-
centrated on the reader’s understanding of the verbal components (Charney, Reder,
and Wells 1988). Such research yields valuable insights into reader behavior, yet it
should be questioned in terms of how easily these findings can be transferred to the
use of other media—primarily the computer screen. It is well known that people do
not read computer screens as they do printed texts. Eye strain, impatience, poor reso-
lution, and so on all play a role in the difficulties of reading the computer screen. In
addition, users are not readers in the sense of using text in a linear fashion (i.e., read-
ing from sentence > to sentence, page to page, and chapter to chapter). Instead,
            =          and  jump   from screen to print and back to screen again (Wright
1983: Salton a oe                ; Hartley 1985).
    Secondly, user-friendly eae points toward the active engagement between a
reader and a text (see Charney, Reder, and Wells 1988), but it usually does so outside
of the context of a user’s actual situation of use. Even though the user-friendly ap-
proach attempts to account for the reader’s situation (see the fourth ring of Figure
6.3), such research is often laboratory controlled for the purpose of collecting data
that can be analyzed under the pressure of statistical significance. Laboratory con-
trolled conditions cannot adequately reflect the complexity of a user’s actual situation
(see Duffy 1985), as the social contingencies brought about by organizational or cul-
tural forces are rarely a focus of this type of research.
     Let me reiterate that this is not a criticism of user-friendly research per se, be-
cause such things as readability measures for the specific purposes of determining
comprehension and memorization of texts can be useful. Instead, | am questioning
the findings that reader-centered, user-friendly research can bring to the problems of
designing documentation for user needs. Users often act differently than readers
(Wright 1989), and a theory of user-centered design should focus on how these differ-
ences rearrange our view of documentation. This means, for example, that the tradi-


1 See Sticht (“Understanding Readers”) and Redish (“Reading To Learn To Do”).
298   Chapter 6   =» Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          tional guidelines regarding the verbal and visual integration of text might be rede-
          fined to meet the needs of the multimedia of user documentation. The medium can
          cause differences in the use of visuals, the format of the written components, and the
          quantity of information to be contained on each page or screen (see Bernhardt 1993).
              To build upon and then move beyond user-friendly conceptions of user docu-
          ments—toward a user-centered Sua tee in Bae to Su                ee the docu-
          mentation production process. Instead                of   lo      at    users as b                      Bare
          ers of text, user-centered design must ask siiestions ofme user’s situation, |sare
                                                                                          medium
          of the documentation, and the organizational  and‘cultural constraints placed upon
          the user and the |    ments. As I have already said, seaman
         friend                      iven by traditional conceptions of reading, and,as the fol-
          lowing discussion of theaR              view will emphasize once again, users are not
          just involved with the act of reading. Instead, they are involved in a complex of dis-
          course that incorporates reading as one of a host of communication, social, and tech-
          nology interactions.                                              eet, -


          CONTEXT, NEGOTIATION, AND THE MEDIUM: THE USER-
          CENTERED VIEW OF COMPUTER DOCUMENTATION
          The user-centered view is philosophically and practically at the opposite end of the
          spectrum from the system-centered view. The philosophy of user-centered computer
          documentation places the user at the center, thus arguing for the user as the driving
          force in the process (see Figure 6.4). By placing users at the center of the approach,
          neither the text nor the system are domina nt features as they were in the other views.
          Instead, the focus of documentation development is placed on the user. In addition,
          this view envisions the user as situated in a particular time and place: the user is not
          using the documentation to learn software abstractly, but rather is learning the com-
          puter application for a specific purpose or purposes. !2
               The core of the user-centered view, then, is the localized situation within which
           the user resides. For example, a computer user may be using a word processor to com-
           plete his or her work. The act of using the word processor, however, is not a localized
           activity but rather a generalized description of what the user is doing. A localized de-
           scription of the user’s situation attempts to explain the specific work-related activity
           that the user is involved with, such as the role that the user holds in an organization
           or institution. Thus, the localized user of a word processor would be described     as a
           “bookkeeper,” a“teacher,” “a
                                     “a nurse,”“adocumentation writer,”
                                                                  and so on. The spe-
           cific nature of users’ work, then, drives documentation that is customized to the con-
           text of use instead of generically explained to a universal user who is the construct of



           12 | should emphasize here the approach that I am advocating is primarily suited to computer users who are
           conducting what Bodker would call “purposive human work” (Through the Interface, 1991). It also is akin to the
           philosophy of work-oriented design of computer artifacts as described by Ehn (1988) and others of the
           “Scandinavian Approach” to technology design (see chapter 4). Thus, the computer documentation I will fo-
           cus on will primarily be for users involved in a work activity, not those using computers for entertainment pur-
           poses.
                                              Johnson        # When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   299




                                                 The
                                           Users' Activity



                                            The Users'



                                                The
                                              Situated
                                                User




                                              with the
                                              Medium




                                              of the
                                          Documentation
                                              Medium



     Figure 6.4.   The user-centered view of computer documentation.



a writer's ae      eos: The focus on the users’ situation also nudges
                                                                 the writer away
          mr           emphasis
                           on the medium (which is still a very crucial component,
as we shall see), and instead forces an analysis of the user as being central to the doc-
umentation process. This removes the writer from a premature preoccupation with
the drafted document, as can be the case with readability or late-in-the-process us-
ability tests where there is typically a relatively complete document in existence.
     The user-centered view continues outward by taking into account the tasks and —
actions the user will be performing as a result of the users’ situation (see the second
ring of Figure 6.4). The focus on tasks within the user’s context separates this ap-
proach from the system-centered approach, because the use of the computer is por-
trayed through user activity, as opposed to system features or system actions. A user-
centered interpretation of a user’s use of the word processor would be “writing a
proposal,” “laying out a page,” or “producing a brochure.” All of these activities could
be considered “using a word processor,” but the general activity depicted in the center
of the user-centered scheme is too generic to accurately describe the actual activity of
the user, especially concerning the documentation that will be written to help the
300   Chapter 6 =      Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          user achieve his or her specific job. A more specific analysis of actual user tasks, as
          they are conducted within the context of use, is necessary.
                   | want to make clear that my concept of user tasks is considerably different than
          has been presented through madisional task analysis (see Bradford 1984; Weiss 1991;
          Barker 1998). In a traditional task analysis, a writer refigures the description of system
          actions into a vocabulary that is more relevant to the user's mental model of what the
          system is doing. Once a hierarchy of overall tasks has been outlined, writers delineate
          the subtasks that move the user from the start to the completion of the overall tasks.
          Traditional task analysis, which historically emerged about the same time as user-
          friendly approaches to computer documentation, was a significant improvement in
          documentation planning because it forced a user perspective into the system and soft-
          ware development processes.
               The dithculty with traditional task analysis in terms of a user-centered perspec-
          tive, however, is twofold. First, the user is relatively unsituated because, although tra-
          ditional task analysis does move toward an understanding of user actions, it does so
          generically, not locally. Based upon a rational description of how the user should act,
          traditional task analysis merely reflects the anticipated actions of an idealized, logical
          user. The task analysis approach, in other wonds, is based on determining generalized
          knowledge that often ignores the local, domain knowledge of the actual, localized
          USeYV.

              Second, d                           ¢ analysis                      \      The
          conception of traditional task analysis is embedded in a hyperrational approach to


          task analysis is user-friendly, but certainly not user-centered. To avoid the rational
            -plication of the system's tasks for the purpose of forcing the user to mimic them, the
          user-centered approach couches tasks within the situation of the user and seeks an-
          swers to questions like, What tasks will the user be performing within the given situ-
          ation? Are these tasks truly user tasks, or are they couched within the terminology of
          system features? Are the tasks placed in an order appropriate to the situation of use?
               In the user-centered approach, a close analysis of other situations and user tasks
          goes well beyond describing the rational system-dictated tasks expected of the user.
          Instead, the analysis attempts to understand the irrational or contingent occurrences
          that users experience within their local, everyday spaces. For instance, it is important
          in user-centered documentation to illuminate fundamental characteristics of users’
          situations to describe those cunning solutions that users have developed for dealing
          with technology. User knowledge of this sort was discussed in chapter 3 in terms of
          mets, the ancient Greek conception of the cunning intelligence that users display in
          everyday contexts. In a similar vein, feminist sociologists have termed this type of
          knowledge “articulation work,” and as Susan Leigh Star explains, it is a type of
          knowledge that can only be “captured” through observation of users in their everyday
          environments, or direct discussion with them in that everyday experience.

                   Articulation work is the work of feting things together in real time in the workplace. . ..
                   [For example, in a medical setting} Articulation work may mean tending to a patient, re-
                   pairing a sentimental mistake in a conversation with a family, or finding a substitute im-
                   plement in the middle of an emergency surgery. You cannot predict ahead of time what
                                                    Johnson      # When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions       301

      might be needed because, by definition, articulation work is contingent and occurs in
      “real time.” Some people’s daily work, such as that of secretaries, homeless people, and
      parents, seems especially rich in articulation. . . . (Epilogue, STS&HYV, p. 504)

To reveal these moments of user knowledge is crucial to documentation. It “gets at”
the essence of human involvement with technology in a situated way that describes
the productive nature of user knowledge within context. These moments of metis or
articulation work depict users producing knowledge, or at least displaying knowledge
that they themselves have constructed/produced in the past and are now using to per-
form in the present situation. Such localized, domain knowledge is unaccounted for
through most computer documentation development processes, and, subsequently,
the localized cunning knowledge of the work environment fails to surface in the writ-
ten texts themselves.
      Beyond the task ring represented in Figure 6.4, before the medium of the docu-
mentation begins to play a central role in the design of the documentation, is the
users’ activity with the medium. One of the most complicated aspects of computer doc-
umentation specifically, and of instructional documents, generally, is that they are
used in conjunction with the act of using a technological artifact or system. Consequently,
it is important in user-centered design to determine which medium will best fit the
particular user situation and tasks. For computers, this distinction has become espe-
cially relevant since the advent of on-line information and has been the source of nu-
merous questions for documentation writers. Whether the documentation should be
delivered in print or on-line is a question asked most often in discussions of docu-
mentation development. Will the user be better served by a print document, on-line
document, or both? Will the user be using the medium in a linear or random manner?
Is the medium capable of providing the user with a familiar model? For example, are
the on-line system capabilities of the system too embedded within the interface, and
thus users would be better served by the more familiar medium of print?
     In addition to a choice of medium, the type of activity that the user is engaged in
must be assessed. In the Discourse Complex of User-Centered Technology (see chap-
ter 2) the three general categories of activity were described as doing, learning, and
producing. In the context of computer documentation, doing describes activities
where users are not reflecting!3 upon their actions for the sake of long-term retention.
For instance, intermittent users of a certain piece of software may just want to be “re-
freshed” concerning the procedures of an action, but they will have little reason to re-
tain that information because they rarely perform the task. Instructions that support
the role of doing, then, usually will be less elaborative, more action-centered, and
highly specific concerning the nature of the users’ situation.


13 The term reflection as used here is not meant in any way to indicate that users are unreflective, or that the
ethics that might be involved with reflection on one’s actions is absent from such a scenario. | merely mean
that users are doing tasks that must be accomplished and that there is little time for memory retention. A good
example of this are the pull-down menus of computer interfaces. People often cannot remember under which
menu item a particular command exists, but once they are placed into a context of use (e.g., they are actually
using a computer interface) they can immediately go to the correct menu choice. They have not taken the
time to learn the actual placement of certain commands, but they nevertheless are knowledgeable users of the
system.
302   Chapter 6 ®    Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



               The term learning, in the computer documentation realm, is revised to learning
          through doing. This change in terminology accounts for the problems associated with
          learning about computers while simultaneously using the computer: a paradoxical sit-
          uation where you are compelled to learn (maybe because your job depends upon the
          new technology), but you are actually more interested in just completing the activity
          at hand.!4 This complicated paradox of learning and doing is, nevertheless, a real
          problem for users, especially those who are experiencing electronic technologies as
          they emerge into existing domains, such as the workplace or classroom. For example,
          if a medical technician is using a computer for the first time to analyze results of a
          blood test, then the technician is bringing expert knowledge of one domain (blood
          test analysis) to a new domain (computer technology) where the technician has little
          or no knowledge. For a technical writer who is determining what to include in the
          documentation for the blood test analysis software, it can be unclear which domain of
          knowledge is affecting any breakdowns that might occur.
               More importantly, the user (the medical technician in the aforementioned case)
          is learning to carry out tasks at the same time he or she is doing the tasks. The scenario
          of this activity would be that the user is, at one moment, using the artifact (the com-
          puter), “reading”!5 the documentation (print or on-line), and attempting to extrapo-
          late data that is meaningful in his or her knowledge domain. To account for this com-
          plex of activity, |have expanded the term learning to learning through doing to better
          represent the activity that users are engaged in while learning computer software.
          Documentation is compelled to manage this dichotomy for users through the careful
          design of print and on-line documents that can accommodate learning and doing si-
          multaneously.
               Producing describes two specific activities of users as they are involved with doc-
          umentation development: activities that are not accounted for in either the system-
          centered or user-friendly views because neither approach invites actual users into
          the development process. First of all, users in a user-centered approach actually take
          part in the production of the documentation. They are involved in such things as
          initial design planning, iterative evaluation and testing of the documentation or
          software, and finally the decision making concerning the implementation of the
          documentation in their respective contexts of use. Second, users are producers in
          the sense of knowledge production (see chapter 3). What they know about the tech-
          nology in question—its documentation, interface characteristics, and situations of
          use—are necessary prerequisites for involving users in technology development and
          decision making. The user’s physical presence in technology development is not the
          only thing of importance; the knowledge of the user must be valued as well. In a


          \4 Mary Beth Rosson and John Carroll refer to this as “the paradox of the active user.” Their observations of
          users showed that users want to learn, but often are more interested in just “getting on with it.”
          15 Reading is in quotation marks to designate the problems of reading discussed earlier in terms of the user-
          friendly view. | contend that computer users do not read in any conventional way, and thus the concept of
          reading is problematic. This is true if we are designing documentation that we anticipate as material to be read
          as if it were an “armchair” document or a textbook that one reads in a library carrel, removed from the context
          of technological use.
                                        Johnson   # When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   303


user-centered approach to documentation, the producing user is crucial because the
process of user-centered documents is a collaborative, negotiated affair that is per-
petually building the knowledge of users and their various contexts into the products
being developed.
    In itself, the social interaction of users, developers, writers, and marketing spe-
cialists should be adequate reason for adopting user-centered approaches to many dif-
ferent forms of technology development, including documentation. Unfortunately,
the act of involving users so intimately in the development process is met with much
resistance. One barrier is the already mentioned schism between experts and novices.
Users, because of their role as the “unknowing subject,” are deemed unworthy of par-
ticipation in the highly specialized world of the technology developer. More likely,
however, the reason for noninvolvement of users is the perception that it simply is
too costly. Such arguments concerning profits margins have merit, but only within
the context of short-term economic strategies. Certainly it is more expensive to com-
mit time and resources to user involvement on a per project basis, especially if each
project is seen as being unconnected to future versions of, or extensions of, the prod-
uct. User input, though, is something that has value far beyond the present moment
of testing a particular product. Capturing the knowledge of users and tracking such
 information over the long term could only be beneficial.
      The long-term advantages of allowing users to play a role in the production
process are potentially great, however, and some research has pointed to the positive
effects for financial reward and customer satisfaction when actual users are allowed to
work with the production teams (Ehn 1988; Nielsen 1993). Full effect of user in-
volvement in production, though, has never been measured because of our culture’s
proclivity to base most production decisions on short-term motives and outdated cost
accounting procedures that focus, in a very limited way, on month-to-month (and
sometimes even day-to-day) analyses of the “bottom line” (see Johnson and Kaplan
 1987). User-centered approaches to technology development are, in part, counter to
the short-term mind-set of business planning because the benefit of user involvement
can best be measured over the long term.
      At the outer ring of the user-centered view is the design of the documentation.
User-centered designing of the medium is now possible because the prerequisites of
the user’s situation, tasks to be performed, and purposes for using the chosen medium
have been determined. The placing of the design or writing of the documentation at
the outside of the user-centered view should not be taken pejoratively, however.
Rather, it is the end of a production process that is consciously driven by the needs of
the user. This does not diminish the role of documentation. On the contrary, it is an
enhancement because it argues for user documentation that is in the image of the
user’s model, not the system model or system designer’s model. A user-centered ap-
proach, in essence, is a thorough form of audience analysis that is aimed at designing
documentation that fits what a user actually does, not necessarily what we think he or
she should do.
     A final feature in the user-centered view is represented by the arrows that indi-
cate movement in both directions, instead of the singular inward to outward move-
ment of the other two perspectives. In the system-centered and user-friendly views,
304   Chapter 6   =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents




                                       Institution                                 Discipline


           Culture                                   Learning
                                                     Through
                                                       Doing


                                                                 Medium



                                                                A Users   x

                                                       User Tasks/           Writers
                                                     System Actions




                                                                 Producing




                                                                Community




            Figure 6.5. The user-centered rhetorical complex of computer documentation.




           knowledge is put forth from the place of a singular authority (either the system or a
           text). These nonnegotiable views not only treat the user as a mere receiver, but they
           also exclude the user from an active involvement in the processes of production, as
           mentioned earlier. The two-way movement of the user-centered view depicts the re-
           cursive and negotiated nature of the user-centered approach to computer documenta-
           tion, specifically, and technology, generally. The user-centered perspective invites in-
           volvement by the user throughout the process. The two-way movement attempts to
           disperse authority through a recursive process that is always in motion and always
           correcting itself, dependent upon situational contingencies. In an actual documenta-
           tion production cycle, this recursive movement from user out to the medium and
           back again could occur numerous times—a truly iterative design technique.
                To further elaborate the user-centered perspective, I will now turn to the user-
           centered rhetorical complex of technology (see chapter 2) for the purpose of revising
           it to meet the context of computer documentation (see Figure 6.5). I will begin by
                                        Johnson   * When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   305


describing the major changes that alter the complex for the context of computer doc-
umentation.



THE RHETORICAL COMPLEX AND
COMPUTER DOCUMENTATION
I do not intend to fully elaborate upon the entire complex here (for that you can turn
to chapter 2). Instead, I will focus on either those elements of the complex that have
been renamed for the purposes of defining user-centered computer documentation, or
on those that need additional explanation because of their role in the processes of
computer documentation production.
     The artisans/designers of computer documentation are the writers who plan, de-
sign, and produce the user documents. There have been many discussions over the
years pertaining to the label of “writers” as a meaningful designation for those indi-
viduals who create the instructional texts for computers and other complex technolo-
gies (see Haselkorn 1988). Companies have termed the producers of documents as in-
formation developers, document designers, communication specialists, or any
number of other titles. The Council of Programs in Technical and Scientific
Communication has carefully chosen the term communicator, in part to clarify that
technical communicators do more than just work with written text. I do not wish to
debate the relevance of accurately describing the activities that technical communi-
cators do in their jobs: technical writers clearly do more than just write text.
Nevertheless, given the potential shortcomings of the term, I have chosen writers to
designate those who plan, design, and produce the various types of texts we call user
documentation. Thus, writers become the artisans/designers in the complex in the
context of documentation development.
     The artifact/system is changed to medium to reflect the nature of the artifact that
the writers work with. Documentation writers may be writing about computers, but
the artifacts they create are the documents that reside in different media.
Documentation, of course, comes in two primary media—print and on-line—but
there are numerous variations of these media as a result of video, audio, animation,
color, voice, telecommunications, and hypertext structures. Consequently, what was
once the relatively “simple” and stable artifact of print is mow much more complex, at
least from a writer’s point of view. Also, the advent of desktop publishing has made
the role of the writer much more diverse than just a mere scribe or wordsmith who
transfers the information about the system from the system designers to a text. Those
writers who work with print technology are expected to produce camera-ready copy, a
phenomenon that was rarely seen before the development of the laser printer and
postscript technology. The medium, then, is not only an important factor for the user
of technology but for writers who must meet the challenges of learning to “write” for
different communication forms.
     The terminology of the third point of the triangle, the user tasks/system actions,
does not change literally, but the characteristics of this feature are of utmost impor-
tance in computer documentation and thus deserve some further explanation. As ex-
306   Chapter 6 = Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          plained in chapter 2, the user tasks are the actions of use as perceived by the user. The
          system actions, on the other hand, are the actions that the computer system was pro-
          grammed to accomplish by a system developer. The point at which these two aspects
          of technology meet is commonly called the interface, the place where the user meets
          the machine during the context of use.
               The disjunction between user tasks and system actions is at the heart of the prob-
          lem of user breakdown. Users often perceive their use of technology differently than
          the represented actions of the system. For instance, in fax machine documentation
          the action of sending a message to multiple recipients is commonly called “polling.”
          While this terminology might be clear to the developer of the system, it is the rare
          user who perceives the action of sending to multiple recipients as “polling.” Users
          would perceive this task as “sending to multiple recipients,” or “distributing to more
          than one client.” It is this visual and verbal description of the system (in print, on-
          line, or as a label on a control panel) that represents the use of the technology that is
          meant by the rhetorical element of user tasks/system actions. For writers, the crucial
          problem concerning user tasks and system actions is to understand the nature of these
          breakdowns and adjust the documentation (in the best of worlds, to fix the system it-
          self) to represent the users’ perception of tasks.


               The aforementioned descriptions of user-centered concepts should offer some in-
          sight into the possibilities for application of the concepts to actual documentation
          writing practices. In any case, they offer a foundation for further discussion of what
          the impact of user-centered theory might be on documentation development prac-
          tices. In the next section, I will use this foundation to discuss the issue of documenta-
          tion genres—the types of documents that are written for users of computers—to in-
          vestigate the nature of documentation within the rhetorical complex.


          GENRES IN THE MAKING: THE CASE
          OF THE UBIQUITOUS TUTORIAL
          Genres are taxonomic devices that provide order and meaning to many everyday arti-
          facts. While genres can be used to categorize any number of artifacts, they have been
          used widely to categorize virtually all types of text.!© When we pick up a newspaper,
          for example, we immediately have certain expectations about what we will be read-
           ing, how we will move through the text, and what we will do with the text once we
          have finished with it (wrap fish, of course). We know the category of text (journalis-
          tic) and what subcategory of journalistic text it is (newspaper). This tacit knowledge
          of text places it into groupings that aid us as we interpret it, and use it, in particular
          contexts.
               Genres like newspapers have been around for quite some time: they have histori-
          cally established context of use, and the expectations for these genres is generally un-
          derstood by a wide audience. When traditional genres are resituated within a new


           16 For more on genre, see chapter 3 of JoAnne Yates’ Control through Communication.
                                            Johnson   #   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   307


context, though, the revised use and purpose of the text can be the cause of a refor-
mulation of the genre itself. This is currently happening with the genre of newspapers
as they are put on-line over the WorldWide Web (although I hesitate to guess what
the new genre might be called because the phenomenon is so new). The generic
structure and purpose is fluid and being redefined as people learn how to use, and how
they want to use, the new on-line medium of journalism. Thus, the situations we use
texts within, and the technological medium of the text, have a great deal to do with
how they are used and how they should be designed. In a discussion of technological
artifacts as genres, John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid offer the following example of
this phenomenon:
    No artifact is self-sufficient. The spot-lit, pristine artifact commanding the center of at-
    tention among the usual array of potted plants at a trade show reveals very little about
    whether, or how, or why it will or will not be used. But the artifact in the workplace,
    plastered with stick-ums or Scotch tape, modified or marginalized by practice, and em-
    bedded in social activities, can tell a rich, well-situated story. Consequently, in contem-
    plating usability, designers cannot just consider isolated (and isolating) notions of func-
    tionality. Instead, they have to relate these to the socially and physically embedded
    practices. (p. 174)

Brown and Duguid go on to explain that in the case of genres, even though they
may appear generally static, they are continually changing. “The underlying generic
conventions, though well established and remarkably widespread, are not predeter-
mined. They evolve locally and continually in practice. Change is prompted from
many different directions” (p. 177). Practice, or use, is a determining factor in the
development and recognition of genres. It is not the only determinant, but certainly
the context of use frames genres in certain ways that make text recognizable to dif-
ferent users who are bound within a common situation, such as a community of users
in a place of work.
    Computer documentation genres are an interesting case to investigate concern-
ing fluid, evolving genres. Documentation, either print or on-line, certainly is con-
strained within situations of use, and, as a genre, computer documentation should be
perceived as mutable in terms of how it is designed and constructed. In addition, the
user, as the primary agent of practice or use, also should be perceived as an agent in
documentation design. In reality, however, the genres of computer documentation
are rarely so flexible. Computer documentation historically has been designed to
conform to predetermined notions of users and use: notions that come from a time
when computers were designed for use by experts, or as we have seen in earlier chap-
ters, for idiots. Thus, computer documentation is driven by preconceived ideas of
what they should contain, even if those contents have little to do with the intended
audience’s needs.
     As one peruses most general technical communication textbooks, or texts writ-
ten specifically for the writing of computer documentation, it is evident that the gen-
res of computer documentation (print or on-line) generally are broken into two over-
all categories—texts for doing and texts for learning. The doing texts usually are
suggested for the advanced, or expert, user and include print documents such as refer-
ence guides, quick reference guides, and troubleshooting guides. The on-line forms of
the doing texts are loosely placed in the large category known as on-line assistance or
308   Chapter 6 «   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          “Help.” Interestingly, the doing texts are found in a somewhat wide variety of shapes,
          sizes, and other design features. For instance, quick reference information has long
          been customized to meet the need of users ranging from computer users in an office
          setting to engineers using pocket-sized guides for information needed “in the field”
          (see Reitman 1988).
               The learning texts, however, are not so flexible in structure. These documents—
          although subcategorized under labels like the user guides, guided tours, and computer-
          based training—are in most circumstances generically termed tutorial. The genre
          tutorial is supposedly well defined as a “use once, throw away” document—a no-de-
          posit, no-return text that is supposed to get the user “up and running.” Theoretically,
          the tutorial will be used in a linear, step-by-step manner as the user moves from one
          lesson to the next, each lesson presumably slightly more difficult or advanced than
          the previous one. Once the user has completed the assigned lessons in the tutorial, it
          is assumed that the user will abandon the tutorial and proceed either on his or her
          own volition, or with the occasional assistance of a reference guide.
                In practice, however, tutorials are seldom used once and then abandoned. In the
          worst case, the tutorial is the computer world’s epitome of the “when in doubt, use the
          instructions” attitude that began this chapter. In these cases, it is more common than
          not that the tutorial will remain in the protective shrink wrap, not to be used at all.
              In the best case, the tutorial can become a long-term resource for the user.
          Because the user has become familiar with the structure, look, and language of the tu-
          torial, he or she returns to it often to refresh the memory, or maybe to learn from a
          lesson that was never completed because either time ran short or the relevance of the
          lesson was unclear at that moment. Tutorials also can appear less intimidating be-
          cause they often are shorter and less bulky than the large reference documents that
          portend to contain all of the knowledge of the system. Unfortunately, tutorials that
          are consciously designed to support long-term, user-centered goals are far less com-
          mon than those designed for one-time use. In fact, the tutorials that are used in the
          long term probably were not consciously designed for that purpose. Instead they have
          been adapted serendipitously for long-term use by the user with techniques that use
          sticky notes, highlighter pens, and dog-eared page corners.
              There is no reason, however, that tutorial documents could not perform a
          broader array of functions for users. First, however, the genre “tutorial” will have to be
          redefined. The concept of tutorials as learning through doing documents offers one per-
          spective on how this can be accomplished. If learning documents such as the ubiqui-
          tous tutorial are re-thought through the problems of synchronous learning and do-
          ing—learning through doing—then they can become a more customized text in
          terms of design. The process of creating such documents, of course, entails analyses in
          accordance with the user-centered view (see Figure 6.4): the user’s particular situa-
          tion, specific tasks, and proclivity for and access to print and on-line media would be
          necessary. While J will not carry out such a process in detail here, I will use an exam-
          ple from a user-centered document that in many ways overcomes some of the difficul-
          ties of the use once, throwaway tutorial (See Figure 6.6).
              Figure 6.6 is from a manual intended to introduce a new user to a database soft-
          ware (File Maker Pro® 2.1). The specific user of this document is a secretary who has
          the responsibility of keeping the records of applicants and current students in a grad-
                                          Johnson   »   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   309


uate program at Miami University. The secretary’s computer experience had for many
years consisted of using an early Wang® system that had no graphical capabilities and
limited word processing capabilities (in other words, it was not a what-you-see-is-
what-you-get system). This particular secretary, however, was highly experienced
with the context of this office setting, as she had held the position for nearly a decade
before the new Macintosh® system was introduced.
     As you can see from the two pages excerpted from the manual, the user’s situa-
tion is central as the document has been customized to focus on just the tasks associ-
ated with applicants to, or current students of, the graduate programs. Thus, specific
instances of entering information appropriate to this context are used in the exam-
ples of the manual. On the first page of Figure 6.6, the italicized information immedi-
ately to the left of the computer screen “shot” indicates how to size a box of “Degree
Sought” information. This direct link to the user's specific context reduces ambiguity
pertaining to the uses of particular fields in the database; it also creates a familiar con-
text within which the user can immediately learn an action while actually accom-
plishing a necessary task related to her work.
     Also notice that the information of “how-to” is explained in more than one way.
At the top of the second page in Figure 6.6, for instance, the user is given three rea-
sons for changing the layout of the screen. These three suggestions are then followed
by an explanatory note that further justifies some of the choices for layout arrange-
ments. [t could be argued that such choices might interfere with a user’s notions of
completing a given task because the choices could lead to confusion on the user’s
part. In the case of this manual, however, the writers observed that she specifically
wanted information that could be used more than once: she needed the document to
be an asset in her different stages of learning the database.
     Another user-oriented characteristic of this manual is the use of the two icons at
the bottom of each page—one depicting a computer screen, the other a printed text.
During observations of the secretary carrying out her work, and through interviews
with her in the design process, the writers discovered that she never turned to the
database’s on-line “Help” for assistance. The old Wang® system did not have on-line
Help, and consequently she had never witnessed on-line assistance in any of her pre-
vious experience with computers.
     Through further analyses of the secretary and her use of on-line Help, the writers
defined two problems related to the use of different media. First, they observed
through user testing that when she was prompted by them to use Help she appreci-
ated, to some extent, that the information was “at her fingertips.” Despite this appre-
ciation for the expedient nature of the on-line documentation, her proclivity was to
use print documents when she needed assistance. To provide assistance to her that
would account for this proclivity, the writers devised the print and on-line options at
the bottom of the pages. They additionally felt that the icons would be highly visible
and that, eventually, she might begin to use the on-line Help information with
greater frequency if she was reminded of its presence through the icons on the printed
pages of the manual.
    The icons at the bottom of the pages also serve the purpose of providing the user
with immediate feedback concerning the whereabouts of further instructional elabo-
ration. As you might expect, this customized, situation-specific manual would not be
310   Chapter 6 = Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents




                                                                                                            CREATING AND Epitinc Layouts
                  Changing the Format of a Layout

                                   Each arrangement of Graduate Program Applicants information is called a
                                   layout. You can easily create a new arrangement of information or change the
                                   way information is displayed or treated in fields by creating a new layout or
                                   editing an existing one.

                                   To create or edit layouts, change to the Layout mode.

               Getting to Layout   Get to Layout mode by
                           Mode    ° choosing it under the Select menu
                                       or
                                   * clicking the mode button to the left of the bottom scroll bar
                                       to bring up a pop-up menu. Select Layout from this menu.
                                   Layout mode looks like Browse mode, except you get rulers, section breaks,
                                   and editing tools for changing the size, appearance, and placement of fields.


                                   The square              " @       File Edit    Select     Layout   frrange   Format   Scripts   Window
                                   corners around                :
                                   the "Degree
                                   Sought" field           :                           ;
                                    indicate that this     ff          ;         smh               Nas a           Fog
                                   field has just          ;                               (Commas. <3} StySteteZp (Oy
                                   been selected. It                                                                      ee
                                   muy now be
                                   moved or resized
                                   with the cursor,
                                   or its appearance
                                   maybe changed
                                   by selecting
                                   options from the
                                   pull-down menus.




                                    For On-Line help see                                    For help from manual see

                                    Designing Layouts                                       Working with Layout Parts and Fields 3-27
                                                                                            to 3-59; Adding, Editing, and Formatting
                                                                                            Layout Text 3-60; Moving Objects 3-82


            Figure 6.6. Two pages from the database document.
                                                   Johnson      ®   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions      311



   Appuicant DATABASE




        Changing the      You may want to change a layout for several reasons. You may want to adjust it
      Arrangement of      __so it's easier to read on the screen, you may need to add or delete a field, or you
             a Layout     may need to set up a layout for printing different versions of a report.

                                 NOTE: It seems to work best to have separate layouts for
                                 viewing and printing, since features like colored boxes and field
                                 borders make reading information on the screen easier, but
                                significantly clutter up a printout. Also, some fonts and font
                                sizes will be more readable on the screen than others, but they
                                 may be too big or less readable when printed. Separate layouts
                                for viewing and printing allow you to control the appearance
                                 and of your text with formats you set up once and use over and
                                over. (For an example of a good print layout, see the section on
                                 compiling a list of applicants by program, p. 12.)

                          In Layout mode, items in a layout may be moved around simply by clicking and
                          dragging on them with the pointer tool (the arrow). Use rulers, and grids to
                          help guide placement.


         Changing the     To change the appearance of text in the layout
       Appearance of
                 Text     *     Use the text tool (the A box) to select or highlight the text
                                you want to change. Select the new appearance from the
                                options in the Format menu.

                          *     Use the pointer tool (the arrow) to select the fields you wish
                                to change. Each selected field will be highlighted by small
                                boxes in the corner. Select the new appearance from the
                                options in the Format menu.
                                     (Holding down the shift key while selecting fields allows
                                you to change more than one field at a time. You may also
                                Sevect ALL fields on the Edit menu.)




                          For On-Line help see                      For help from. manual see
                          Designing Layouts                         Adding, Editing, and Formatting Layout Text
                                                                    3-60; Changing the Shape and Size of Objects
                                                                    3-82;


Figure 6.6. (continued)       Two pages from the database document.
312   Chapter 6   =   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered   Documents



          expected to contain the extensive “complete” elaboration found in the commercial
          documentation accompanying the software package. To overcome this potential defi-
          ciency, page number references and topic identifiers were added adjacent to the icons.
          Through the page number references and topic identifiers taken from the industry-
          produced publications, the writers provided access to greater amounts and varieties of
          information: a feature that produces something of a “hyper” quality of the documen-
          tation as the user can move in random, yet linked, ways through the entire library of
          documentation for the software. Thus customized reference by specific page number
          and topic allows for integration of the entire set of user documentation for this data-
          base software—an integration guided by the actual situation of use.
               The writers also found some interesting vocabulary problems that may very well
          have been the result of an expert-driven task analysis procedure, as discussed earlier
          in this chapter regarding user-friendly documentation. While investigating the prob-
          lem of integrating the two mediums of documentation, the writers uncovered incon-
          sistencies between the respective vocabularies of the existing print and on-line docu-
          mentation for the database software. As they collected the task vocabulary for both
          the print and on-line information, they encountered quite different terminology for
          the different tasks. For instance, at the bottom of the first page of Figure 6.6, the on-
          line terminology is “Designing Layouts,” but the print documents refer to this task as
          “Working with Layout Parts and Fields,” or “Moving Objects.” Instead of using one
          term for each task, the writers decided to offer the various renditions of the task vo-
          cabulary as they appeared in the different pieces of the documentation set. This fea-
          ture offered a mini-index on the same page as the how-to “learning” information,
          making the “tutorial” a quasi-quick reference manual too.


               It is somewhat easy to get involved with the analysis of texts and forget that
          there might be other issues at stake when we think about instructional documents.
          The title of this chapter, I believe, should be a constant reminder to technical writers
           that users have little affinity for instructional assistance: they will use it only when all
           else fails. Put another way, users of most technologies, and most pointedly users of
           computer technologies, often see documentation as something that can get in the
           way. The very presence of documents, whether print or on-line, presents the danger
           of users becoming disengaged from the learning/doing processes, because the docu-
           ments can draw the attention away from the activity at hand.
                An obvious consequence of this propensity by users to avoid instructions is that
           documentation, and those who write it, will remain invisible in the technology de-
           velopment and implementation processes. To a great extent this is already the case,
           as the perceived need for on-line texts is somewhat dubious. For example, I would ar-
           gue that the tendency for some software manufacturers to put all of their products’
           documentation into on-line formats is driven more by economic concerns than by
           concerns for the users of the documents. Some on-line documentation is nothing
           more than the print documentation reentered into on-line Help with little or no at-
           tempt to alter the information to fit the use of the new medium. Such lack of interest
           in the design and use of on-line documentation, although not a new phenomenon,
                                                      Johnson     =   When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions       313


certainly does not bode well for its future as an important, viable component of
everyday user technologies.
     The invisibility of writers also is a problem as they are hardly at the top of the tech-
nology development hierarchy. Too often the role of writers has been “to write it up” at
the end of the development process: a problem that clearly is a source of the system-
centered, functionality-based documentation and interface designs that have domi-
nated the personal computer industry for most of its short but influential history. In
brief, the issue of empowering writers within their workplace contexts looms large in
the domain of instructional text. In the conclusion of this chapter I will take up these
two issues of invisibility regarding technical writers and the texts that they produce.



TO DOCUMENT                   OR NOT TO DOCUMENT?
As we already have seen in several instances, users face a double bind when they are
confronted with the problem of learning new technologies through instructional
texts. To engage with a technical artifact and a text at the same moment is a complex
and frustrating task that illuminates the paradox of learning through doing. In their
research on the minimal manual, John Carroll and his associates characterize this
paradox in a way that is most useful in clarifying this fundamental difficulty of tech-
nological use. Carroll et al. differentiate between two types of learning procedures:
learning by the book, and learning by doing.
      Learning by the book models the kind of learning process for which self-instruction man-
      uals as a genre are designed. Learning while doing attempts to model procedurally the
      task-oriented skipping and self-initiated approach. . . which we have taken to be charac-
      teristic of real learning. . . . (Carroll 1990, p. 176)
In the previous discussion of the secretary’s database, we saw how learning by the
book and learning by doing might be confronted through documentation that chal-
lenges traditional notions of genre. The lenses used to design the new genres, how-
ever, may be rose colored; it can be argued that the presence of documents in the
context of active learning is itself futile. Will users even use these documents that
have been carefully crafted for their contexts? If texts get in the way of active learn-
ing, this skeptical perspective might ask, why create user documents at all? Why not
just make the interface so usable that documentation is never needed?!”
     HyperCard® for the Apple Macintosh® is an example of this perspective that ad-
vocates the dissolution of documentation. Especially in its early days, Hypercard® was
touted as being so easy to use, due to the graphical interface of the Macintosh® and
the icon-driven HyperCard® application, that the documentation for learning
Hypercard® was merely created as adjunct material hardly needed once a user had a
very brief tutorial introduction to the application. Anecdotal evidence of this atti-



1? This certainly is not a novel claim, as the eradication of user rmanuals through better interfaces has long been
the goal of interface designers like Donald Norman.
314   Chapter 6   ®   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



          tude toward HyperCard® can be given, but the following statement                     from   a
          HyperCard® User’s Guide provides some evidence:
              This ends your tutorials on HyperCard’s basics. You know enough now to get off to a great
              start. You can go on reading in this manual to learn more about HyperCard or you can go
              off on your own, browsing and editing as you like. ... Happy wandering! (p. 59-60)
          One of the concepts of HyperCard®, and hypertext in general, is that it is a user-con-
          trolled environment, and therefore exploration, play, and experimentation are activi-
          ties users can engage in to learn. Such a concept can be good. If a user is enjoying
          himself or herself, then it is probable that learning will occur. The depth of the learn-
          ing, and the relevance for that style of learning within a particular context, though, is
          problematic. Play and experimentation would be fine when there is little pressure on
          the user to perform, but in a workplace or educational context some guidance and
          strategies for use probably are more appropriate. In the case of HyperCard®, for exam-
          ple, other levels of the software are useful, even necessary, for users (i.e., scripting, im-
          porting and exporting graphics or video) that would be difficult or nearly impossible
          to learn without some documented advice or guidance.
               It does not seem at all clear to me that computer documentation will disappear.
          But we can be assured that the role, look, and medium of documentation will shift. It
          may even be the case that computer documentation will have to blend into ill-de-
          fined contexts, like those of intense collaboration between users as they learn net-
          worked electronic technologies. To ensure that these shifts are user-centered will take
          a concerted effort by writers to assure that it is not a determined shift: a shift dictated
          by the technological imperative that we hear so often in phrases like, “It just cannot
          be helped. This is the world we live in now!” In short, we should be ready to help de-
          fine any shifting before the shifting pressures us into documentation practices that
          neglect user-centered goals.



          BEYOND THE TEXT: WRITERS, WRITERS, EVERYWHERE
          As the discussion of shifting genres demonstrates, the user-centered argument con-
           cerning computer documentation is not without roadblocks. There is one issue, how-
          ever, that may be the most problematic of all—creating customized documentation
          for specific, localized contexts and the corresponding number of writers needed to de-
          sign and develop the documents. Arguments for situating documents within contexts
          are not entirely new. Literacy advocates, for instance, have argued that literacy train-
           ing is much more effective if situated within contexts relevant to the learner (Sticht
           1985). This makes sense. Many people are more motivated if they can see a connec-
           tion between what they are learning and the intended application of their new
           knowledge. Unfortunately, putting such localized ventures into practice is more easily
           said than done.
                A most obvious difficulty is that writers who are knowledgeable in user-centered
           design must be hired to create these documents. This not only means that software
           development companies might hire these writers, but more specifically, it argues for
           institutions using the software to employ writers who can, on an ongoing basis, create
           documentation for the constantly fluctuating audience of users in the institution’s
                                          Johnson    *   When All Else Fails, Use the Instnictions   315


employ. At present, such a scenario—where writers would be hired to create numer-
ous Custom documents—might appear absurd. How would institutions that are facing
downsizing and other cost-cutting pressures make room for writers? There is no easy
answer to this. But let me attempt to explain.
     The usability evaluation and testing that must accompany user-centered design is
costly, but, as I have already mentioned, only in terms of short-term management.
These costs can be recovered over time through better design decisions that hopefully
make the products more accessible to a wider body of users. This argument has already
been made in several quarters in terms of “discount” usability (see Nielsen 1993). Most
of these solutions, however, do not include technical writers. To include writers will
mean efforts to recast writers. Writers will not only need to change the moniker that
denotes them, but they will need to find avenues into other domains of technological
design and development. For example, I have observed institutions that regularly in-
crease the number of system administrators as computer usage increases within the or-
ganization. These administrators, in turn, take on various roles that include user liai-
son or software support. Writers could easily fulfill many of the functions of these
system-trained administrators, particularly those tasks that involve the learning of sys-
tems. Companies and institutions that recast writers in new roles such as these could
also benefit from the development of the print and on-line texts the writers would pro-
duce. The information about how to use the software would no longer be in oral (word
of mouth) format, but instead would be formally documented, thus making documen-
tation updates and more widespread, consistent training possible.
     In addition, if institutions learn to value the worth of training materials more
highly, especially materials customized to fit specific user situations, then writers will
have more central roles in the maintenance of user systems. Surely many institutions
have users who regularly underuse the computers in their domain because they are ei-
ther unaware of the potential or are too strapped for the time to learn new features
that would aid them in their jobs. Consistently updated custom documentation
would be a great asset in such situations.
     As documentation increasingly goes on-line, the role of writers should increase
as well. Writers will certainly be called upon to enter the old print information into
on-line formats, and this should be done, of course, through user-centered methods if
there is any intention of creating usable products. In addition, writers should increas-
ingly take on the role of interface designer. The interface, after all, is a “text” that re-
sides between the user and the black box of the system—a multiple media text that
includes documentation. Writers already are interface designers, in other words, but
recognition of this technical communicator skill is rare outside the realm of technical
communication.
    A recasting of the technical writer, though, will ultimately call for an increased
role in the decision-making processes of technological development. This case has al-
ready been made strongly for the user, both in this book and elsewhere (see Bravo
1993). Users are low on the proverbial totem pole and are rarely allowed access to the
decision-making circle. Technical writers, I fear, are equally invisible in these circles
where the design, development, and potential impact of technologies are (at least to
some extent) determined. To employ writers in decision making is not that far-
fetched; it is at least not any more far-fetched than the aforementioned argument to
rethink writers as interface designers. Consider the following scenario:
316   Chapter 6   ®   Professional Writers Produce User-Centered Documents



              The Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority was experiencing a problem concerning the
              opening of their newly refurbished subway system. The system is a wonderfully designed, effi-
              cient technology ready to whisk people across the Washington metro area. An especially impor-
              tant aspect of the new system is the automated ticketing system. To use the system is, on a sur-
              face level, relatively easy. You choose your destination, locate the cost for the ride on a chart,
              deposit dollar bills in the automated ticket machine, and then you receive a ticket with the appro-
              priate amount for your destination. A glitch, however, was noticed in the new automated ticket-
              ing system. Maybe “glitch” isn’t the right word, because the problem wasn’t in the mechanics of
              the system—this worked perfectly well. The problem was in the anticipated confusion that new
              users to the subway would have learning how to use the ticketing machines.
                  Imagine that you are one of several thousand commuters using the new system on your way
              to work. You have never used the ticketing machine, and as you stand in line waiting to purchase
              the ticket, you read the instructions posted beside the machine. As your turn to use the machine
              draws closer, you realize there are actually a number of tasks to carry out in order to be certain
              you have purchased the correct ticket for the correct price. Befuddled, you are jostled by others in
              the line and eventually lose your place in line. Finally, you figure out the procedure, but now you
              must wait for the next train.

               During design evaluations of the system, the designers saw the possibility of this
          learning problem. How were they to be sure that thousands of new users of the sys-
          tem, in a hurry on their way to work, would use the new ticketing system (paid for, in
          part, through taxes levied on the new users)? The answer was ingenious. The transit
          authority hired a number of people to act as “experts” during the early days of opera-
          tion of the new system. These “experts” were trained to use the ticketing machines,
          and when the system opened on its first day, they were there to act as expert users so
          the new users could observe. These “expert” ticket buyers merely went though the
          lines time after time so others could watch them. They were not in uniforms or any
          other official clothing: they merely looked and acted like users who knew what they
          were doing and who the “novices” could watch.
               The decision to solve the problem of the ticketing machines in this way could
          easily have been from the minds of technical communicators: people who have an
          affinity for and are advocates of users. | am sure technical communicators had some-
          thing to do with the writing of the instructions that sit beside the ticketing machines,
          but I am less sure that writers would have been involved with the decision to create
          “expert” users who serve as models. Such decisions are traditionally left to the design-
          ers, engineers, and developers: a tradition that portrays the developers as decision
          makers and writers as scribes. Once again, we see the issue of knowledge rearing its
          head. Who has it? How is it produced? In the final chapter we will conclude by taking
          this problem of knowledge into yet another context—the academic sphere. Here we
          will see the possibilities, and the inevitable limitations, that exist in the realm of the
          technical rhetorician.

          DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Explain the differences between the following two statements: the end of documentation
                is explaining X technology vs. the end of documentation is the use of X technology by Y
                users. As part of your discussion, explain how these two different conceptions of the ends
                of documentation affect the work of instructional writers/designers, such as computer
                documentation writers.
                                              Johnson   #   When   All Else Fails, Use the Instructions   317


 . Define the distinction between “readers” and “users” and summarize how the distinction
       affects professional writing.
WN   . Johnson claims that “instructions are more often than not an afterthought of the technol-
       ogy development process.” Explain what he means, and describe how the resulting posi-
       tion of instructional writing within the technology development process affects what in-
       structional/documentation writers do. Finally, describe how the writers work might
       change if writing instructions were work integrated throughout the technology develop-
      ment process.
     . Explain what Johnson means when he says writers must be willing to “recast” themselves
        in order to overcome the limitations (e.g., increased costs) of user-centered writing.
        Assess what writers and workplaces gain and lose as writers recast themselves in order to
        increase user-centered writing.
      . Johnson, in the chapter's conclusion, argues that professional writers are “advocates for
        users.” Explain what he means, comparing and contrasting this definition of the profes-
        sional writer with whom professional writers are in both the system-centered and user-
        friendly models of writing.
                  CHAPTER 6

                  Projects
           1. On your campus, the Web, or around town, locate a document (e.g., a brochure, product in-
              structions, Web site splash page, or drug advertisement back page) that requires whole-doc-
              ument level revisions. Develop a revision plan based on your assessment of the document
              and produce a mock-up of the revised document. Do this work individually.
              Then in groups of three or four, share your documents, discuss your assessments of each
              document, share with one another your revision plans and mock-ups, and solicit feedback to
              improve revision plans/mock-ups. Based on your group feedback, work individually to pro-
              duce a second mock-up for your document. Then, using the technologies available to you,
              produce as complete a revision as possible.
               Be prepared to discuss your original and revised document in class (bring both documents
               in electronic, transparent, or print-copied versions, depending on the technologies available
               in your classroom).
      POCHSSEEOSEOAHSHEHEHHSHSHSSEHHEHSTHHHOHAEHEHOEHSEEEHELEHEHEOE


            . Locate a brief document, like a brochure, restaurant menu, flier, or set of simple computer
              software task instructions. Produce two revisions of the document you have chosen, one re-
              vision that employs less reader-oriented visual language than the original and one that em-
              ploys more.
              In class, form groups of three or four. Share the three documents each member has
              found/produced, and assess what makes visual language more or less reader-oriented. Be
              prepared to present your findings and refer to your examples in class (come with electronic,
              transparent, or print-copied versions, depending on the technologies available in your class-
              room).

            . In groups of three or four, identify a helpful task in a software program that your classmates
              might like to employ. Adopting a user-centered approach, develop documentation that in-
              corporates what you have learned in this chapter about good design.
            . As a class, choose two generally unfamiliar technologies for which you would like to learn
              and develop instructions. Divide the class into six groups: two system-centered design
              groups, one for each technology; two user-friendly design groups, one for each technology;
              and two user-centered design groups, one for each technology. Each group should develop
              a set of instructions for their technology and write clear project plans based on the design
              approach they represent. (All groups should have a shared due date.)
              After the groups have completed their instructions, they should pair-up so that one group
              represents one technology and the other group represents the other (it does not matter if
              groups are or are not paired according to design approaches). Now, each group is paired
              with another group that can serve as a test group for their instructions. Test the usability of
              each group’s instructions. As a class, discuss what was learned about different design
              processes and how those design processes may or may not have affected usability.




318
eeeovesee




°
e
e
°
°
.
.
.



               Professional Writers
°
3
2
e
.
e
e




              Produce Social Space
e
°
.
°
e
°
e
s
e
.
e
.
s
2
e
e

     INTRODUCTION
e
e
2
s
e

2
.
     Do professional writers produce anything more than user-centered texts? One answer
.
     to this question, which is the focus of Chapter 7, is that professional writers also pro-
     Juce
          Texts are the obvious products of professional writers’ work, just as the obvious
     product of a shoemaker is a shoe. What is less obvious—even invisible—in both of
     these cases, though, is that writers and shoemakers also produce what can be called
     social space. In fact, all of us are constantly participating in producing social space.
          Let’s think about an athletic shoe shoemaker. One form of social space produced
     by a large athletic shoemaker is located in the social space of labor. In order to pro-
     duce a shoe, the large shoemaker must employ laborers who can assemble the shoes
     and run the factories.                                                                  k

     ing a range oO



                                 U   os 9U   d


          The same can be said for professional writers. While reading the following selec-
     tions, keep these questions about social space in mind:
        ein what ways might professional writers participate in producing social space?
                what ways might professional writers be constrained by the social spaces
              yin which they work?
               ow can professional writers work to produce social spaces that enhance effec-
            ee: communication?
              ow can professional writers work to produce social spaces that serve their
              users?
       ~@ What forms of social space might professional writers participate in producing?




                                                                                                 319
320   Chapter 7 ® Professional Writers Produce Social Space


                           '
            he    relationships   >    experien                   rk. This kind of space is quite
           concrete. Even more concrete social spaces refer to the ee                  4that sur-
          round us, like buildings and                 s. But social space can also refer to abstract
                                                                                      . As you read,
          think   about the forms of social space, both concrete and abstract, that professional
          writers might participate in producing.
               What you may be sensing at this point is the tight relationship between products
          and social practices. In many ways, the things we produce become, or are themselves,
          actions. If Iproduce a shoe, | am not simply producing a shoe. | am also acting on my
          world and others within it. At the very least, I am saying, “Hey, you should wear
          shoes!” This is the same sort of tight relationship professional writers must become
          aware of in their work. When writers produce texts, they are also producing (or mak-
          ing impossible or difficult) certain relationships between people and ideas. In this
          productive process, writers are also very much acting on their worlds. As you read the
          selections in Chapter 7, think about not only the social spaces that professional writ-
          ers produce but also how these products become social actions in and of themselves.
               In the first selection by Killingsworth and Jones, attention is drawn to the ways
          professional writers’ increasing roles in project management produce workplace rela-
          tions and how these relationships affect the production of texts. Johnson-Eilola and
          Selber discuss how hypertexts participate in constructing and re-producing certain
          kinds of organizational structures. In this selection, they draw attention to the ways
          that texts themselves are social acts. Grabill and Simmons examine, in the final se-
          lection of the chapter, how professional writers partcipate in producing social under-
          standing of “risk,” as well as the citizens faced with risk. In their article, they show us
          that writers, through their practices, produce much more than texts.



           DORPKFOHAHHROSSHHAEHTHTHOHEHTSTEROREHHESE   SOTHO   GST   HF   AOSSHEHROHPSTSEHSHSHELRT
                                                                                      ESF RSEHLHSHRYROHROEHSECOOES


              FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
             lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
             in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
             the field itself.
             1. division of labor model
             2. integrated teams model
             3. Taylorism
             4. linear process
             5. recursive process
             6. self-directed team
                                                 Killingsworth,   Jones ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams                 321

                   SSSVUEH   HELE   ZES   EERE    EEO



 Sanco. OF LABOR      ¢OR= ihwanereuran TEAMS:
     A CRUX IN THE MANAGEMENT OF TECHNICAL
     COMMUNICATION?
 SHAME
   RI AMEE VEY COCK          AE AO COKDO
                                       EO ES                            TASH   FORDET
                                                                                 HREOC ATAHOTER          OHO   ERFEADEH   ORS


     M. JIMMIE KILLINGSWORTH                                        >
     BETSY G. JONES

      wo models of collaboration predominate in the process by which technical docu-
       ments are produced. We call these the dainsleicernote and the integrated
reammodel. Division of labor has tended to prevail since the 1950s, when “technical
writer” first made its appearance as a job title. Writing, editing, and illustrating—not
to mention communication management—had formerly been integrated into other
activities of document production. Engineers and scientists wrote and edited their
own reports, for example. The addition of technical communication support person-
nel no doubt has improved document readability and aesthetics. But the writing
process has become steadily more fragmented and linear.

                                     he proliferation of specialists among communica-
tions professionals also creates a need for managers who find their place in the divi-
sion of labor as reviewers of the documents and perhaps as planners.
     This fragmentation isfurther abetted by the development of specialized “discourse
                 groups such as nuclear physicists, electrical engineers, systems pro-
grammmers, and, now, technical communicators, who are, in turn, specializing as manual
writers, newsletter and brochure managers, medical editors, and so on. These groups
distinguish themselves from others by specific language practices. Technical terminol-
ogy, jargon, and shoptalk reinforce distinctions based on job titles or job descriptions.
     Yet an alternative to this divided practice has begun to emerge in industry, an ap-
proach that could involve




                                                                               eir main task in this approach is
to oil the machinery of collaboration


DIVISION OF LABOR VS. INTEGRATED TEAMS: BACKGROUND
The purpose of this section is to ground our research in the general history and theory
of organizational management and to report briefly on recent literature in technical
communication that is relevant to our topic.

Source: Killingsworth, M. Jimmie, and Betsy G. Jones. “Division of Labor or Integrated Teams: A Crux in the Management of
Technical Communication?" Technical Communication (Third Quarter, 1989), pp. 210-221. Reprinted with permission from
Technical Communication, The Journal of the Society for Technical Communication, Arlington, VA, U.S.A.
322   Chapter 7    ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          Historical and Theoretical Perspective
          The two organizational models have a long history in managerial theory, the essen-
          tials of which are effectively summarized in Managing Communication in
          Organizations: An Introduction by Cummings, Long, and Lewis [1]. The division of la-
          bor approach, with its origins in the classic economics of Adam Smith, was first de-
          scribed as an aspect of modern bureaucratic rationality by Max Weber in 1909. The
          Weberian analysis of bureaucratic organization recognized the following principles:
                  e Hierarchical distribution of power and control
                  ¢ Standardized rules and procedures
                  ¢ Specialization and division of labor according to tasks and subtasks
                  e Employment based on technical competence
                  e Detailed job descriptions
                  e Prescriptive and rigid information flow
                  ¢ Subordination of individual needs to organizational goals.
               Although Weber was ambiguous, even cynical, about the overall effects of this
          type of organization upon human society [2], he was quite clear about the advantages
          he observed in bureaucratic rationality:
                  The decisive reason for the advance of bureaucratic organization has always been its
                  purely technical superiority over any other form of organization. The fully developed bu-
                  reaucratic apparatus compares with other organizations exactly as does the machine with
                  the non-mechanical modes of production. Precision, speed, unambiguity, knowledge of
                  the files, continuity, discretion, unity, strict subordination, reduction of friction and of
                  material and personal costs—these are raised to the optimum point in the strictly bureau-
                  cratic administration [3, 973].

              The Weberian description of efficient division of labor was supplemented by
          Frederick Taylor, the founder of “scientific management,” also known as Taylorism.
          The first “efficiency expert,” Taylor contributed four new principles to the model of
          bureaucratic rationality:
                  e Work should be selected scientifically through rigorous testing.
                  @ Effectiveness should be objectively measured.
                  ¢ Managers are planners.
                  e¢ Workers are doers [1, 36].

                In 1916, Henri Fayol added to this theory of managerial control the five now
           classic principles of management: planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating, and
           controlling (review and evaluation) [1, 36].
                As early as 1927, the beginnings of the integrated team concept began to emerge
           as a dialectical challenge to what was by then the well-established division of labor
           model. The founder of industrial psychology, Elton Mayo, developed the so-called
           “human relations approach,” which offered alternatives to the system of bureaucratic
           management, including the following:
                  ¢ People-oriented rather than production-oriented management
                  ¢ Use of informal work groups
                                 Killingsworth,   Jones ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams         323

       e Emphasis on cooperation rather than competition, building of community
         among workers and managers
       ¢ Inclusion of workers in planning and decision-making
       * Increased concern over worker satisfaction [1, 38-39; 4].

     Like the bureaucratic model, the human relations approach claimed to have
found the key to the manager's foremost concern—productivity. The difference is
that the emphasis in Taylorism and its descendants has fallen upon time and cost effi-
ciency, whereas the emphasis in human relations management falls on worker moti-
vation, which, it is claimed, assures the highest quality products and which is ne-
glected and even suppressed in bureaucratic management despite any advantage that
is realized in terms of time and cost.
     Three recent developments within the human relations tradition support the
emergence of integrated teams: the concepts of meaningfulness of work, self-directed
teams, and informating versus automating.
    Meaningfulness of work. Hackman and Oldham claim that this essential ingredi-
ent in a worker’s motivation—and thereby the key to increased productivity—de-
pends upon three factors:

       © Skill variety: the chance to use and develop a number of skills in a task
       ¢ Task identity: the degree to which the worker identifies with the task, usually
         an effect of being involved from beginning to end
       ¢ Task significance: the worker’s recognition of the task’s importance in the lives
         of other people within the organization and in the world of human relations in
        general [1, 261; 5].

     Self-Directed Groups. Businesses have begun to experiment with project groups
that work on a task from beginning tto end and have a ni degree of decision- making
power in their project                                                                   1       by t

i      ip        reer          ane But thie ene ean system has a motive different
from the tra      “sensitive managers of Japanese industry: “Given risin      a
 eve                Z                 q              {   al      m   tradit    ai   au       O

ner                                                                       1188]. In one com-
pany designed to accommodate these worker needs, “members of autonomous work
groups rotate jobs, select their own members, decide on assignments, monitor their
own performance, provide training for each other, and are paid for the number of
tasks they know how to perform” [9, 1189].
     Rossabeth Kanter, an advocate of this approach, observes, “The organizational
chart with its hierarchy of reporting relationships and accountabilities reflects one re-
ality; the ‘other structure,’ not generally shown on the charts, is an overlay of flexible,
ad hoc problem-solving teams .. .” [10, 488]. Kanter stresses that the purpose of such
groups is to increase the ate oe the setting in which ideas are generated and im-
plemented by drawing team members from a diversity of sources and backgrounds: “It
is not the ‘caution of committees’ that is sought—reducing risk by spreading responsi-
bility—but the better idea that comes from a clash and an integration of perspec-
tives” [10, 489].
324   Chapter 7   ®   Professional Writers Produce   Social Space



                              Table 1. Summaryof Two Organizational Models
                          Division of Labor                              Integrated Teams
           1, Managers hire and assign highly specialized    1. Project teams composed of individuals
           employees to discrete roles in a closely ana-     from various specialties share in a holistically
           lyzed production process.                         determined effort to complete a task.

           2. Tasks are accomplished (i.e, documents are     2. Tasks are accomplished in an informal, of-
           produced) in a step-wise, linear flow.            ten recursive manner that varies according to
                                                             team decisions and capabilities.

           3. Process of document production is managed      3. Process is managed “democratically” by
           and reviewed “from outside” by professional       members of the team or “representatively”
           managers.                                         by a leader within the group who serves as a
                                                             liaison with management.




              Automating versus Informating. In an important new book, In the Age of the Smart
          Machine, Shoshana Zuboff argues that the computerization of the industrial environ-
          ment creates two possible managerial options which stand in direct opposition to one
          another and which run parallel to the two models we have been outlining [11].
          According to Zuboff, managers can use a computer networking either to automate
          their organization, increasing the mechanical control and impersonality of Taylorism,
          or to informate their organizations, using computer networking as a means of provid-
           ing widespread access to information and of opening lines of communication for-
           merly closed in the rigid bureaucratic hierarchy [see also 12]. The tendency to auto-
           mate falls within the division of labor tradition of bureaucratic management, while
           the tendency to informate creates a way of empowering self-directed, integrated
           teams.
                We are now in a position to summarize the two models against the background of
           these dialectically opposed traditions. Table 1 provides a brief comparison of the two
           models.

          Review of Relevant Literature in Technical Communication

          The literature on the management of technical communication often takes division
          of labor for granted. The implicit adoption of the values of bureaucratic and “scien-
          tific” management is suggested by the predominant concern with such issues as in-
          creased specialization, automating, and efficiency in matters of time and cost. Thus,
          the editors of the special issue of Technical Communication dealing with the topic echo
          the classic managerial values of Fayol in their claim that “information . . . is a produc-
          tive resource that can be evaluated and managed for the purposes of planning, con-
          trolling, and decision-making,” though they stop short of giving a mechanistic or
          Tayloristic definition for input (number of hours spent on a project) and output
          (number of pages produced) [13, 216].
                Likewise, while reporting on managerial innovations in technical manual pro-
          duction, Killingsworth and Eiland nevertheless rely on the Fayolian description of
                                Killingsworth,   Jones ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   325


the manager’s tasks—planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating, and controlling—
without recognizing the possibility that management can be participatory [14].
     In a case study of automated management, Shirley Anderson describes a “Job
Tracking System” that exemplifies quite well the use of computers for the kind of au-
thoritarian automating described by Zuboff and that thereby finds its implicit justifi-
cation in the orientation and values of the division of labor model. With the system,
the communication managers are able to monitor—
     * Daily status of individual inputs and projects
     @ Unit productivity, product cost, and vendor performance
     ¢ Employee time entered by task [15, 119].
     If the classical managerial rationales do prevail in the field, how are the tasks of
communicative labor divided? At least two articles have drawn on the division of the
writing process into prewriting (planning and researching a topic), drafting, revising,
and editing—much as it is treated in composition textbooks. Krull and Hurford con-
sider the effect on productivity enabled by computer assistance in each stage of the
process [16]. Manyak encourages managerial intervention at the stages of pre-writing,
revision, and editing—leaving drafting (or “scribing,” to use the term of Krull and
Hurford) to the individual communicator [17].
    No articles have as yet explicitly considered the concept of integrated teams, but a
number of authors provide case studies and anecdotal evidence that such practices
are emerging in technical communication. Dressel, Euler, Bagby, and Dell present a
system of managing proposal production that involves all members of an integrated
team—proposal manager, text coordinator, writers, contract officer, text-processing
leader, and graphics leader—in every stage of the writing process: outlining, drafting,
editing, reviewing, and producing the document in its final form; moreover, this sys-
tem employs informing technologies closely resembling the ideal of Zuboff [18].
    Proietti and Thomas report on an integrated and democratically managed group
in a project to develop an interactive video course; the group includes the project
manager, course developer, programmer,       editor, instructional designer, consultant,
funder, and subject matter experts [19].
    Dilbeck and Golowich describe a company reorganization that effected a fuller
integration of software developers, trainers, and technical writers, with the result that
all the participating employees achieved a higher level ofjob satisfaction: the writers
attained a better sense of “the big picture,” the trainers were grateful for a reduced
writing load, and the developers gained a new respect for the writers and trainers
through a better understanding of their functions; they also attained a higher level of
job performance: training manuals were better written, and user manuals were more
technically astute [20].
     The need to develop effective user manuals has given rise to a number of innova-
tive efforts at collaboration and integration in the computer industry. Wendy Milner,
in asserting that technical communicators can make a contribution to online docu-
mentation, seeks an expansion of the writer’s role into the area of product design [21].
Barstow and Jaynes make essentially the same point in insisting on effective integra-
tion of on-line and hatd-copy instructions for users [22]. Mark Smallwood agrees that
documentation can be improved if writers are included in the initial development of
326   Chapter 7 = Professional Writers Produce Social Space


          software products, though he admits that communicators crossing boundaries in this
          way may be greeted with hostility by designers; writers can win credibility, he suggests,
          only by achieving a degree of technical proficiency and role flexibility [23]. In the
          same vein, Fowler and Roeger advise close collaboration between writers and pro-
          grammers [24]. Chew, Jandel, and Martinich also insist on the “enhanced role of writ-
          ers in the product development cycle,” especially in human factors engineering of user
           interfaces in computer products [25; see also 26, 27].
                Just as the need for good user manuals has spurred new collaborations among
          technical experts (programmers and designers), communicators (writers, editors, and
          artists), and managers in the computer industry, the need to produce a quality prod-
          uct in a hurry has prompted proposal teams to seek innovative techniques of integra-
          tion. The literature on proposal writing for some years now has reported on the suc-
          cess of storyboarding and other graphical techniques of document planning as a way
          of achieving maximum input from team members at various stages of the project [28,
          29, 30]. No longer considered merely a way of illustrating written points, visuals are
          used early in the writing process as a means of encouraging collaboration of various
          team members. This practice breaks the traditional linear path of document develop-
          ment (from planning to drafting to revising to editing to printing) and allows for
          overlap and recursion in the stages of the writing process.



                              Table 2. Summary of Two Organizational Models
                                     _Applied to Technical Communication
                           Division of Labor                                    Integrated Teams
          1. Only managers observe and participate in              1. All members of a document team partici-
          the whole process by which documents are                 pate in all stages of production.
          planned and produced.

          2. Individuals are responsible for a clearly de-         2. Team members are assigned roles based
          fined task which they are trained as specialists         on their training as specialists but share and
          to perform.                                              exchange roles within the team if this will
                                                                   improve the final product.

           3. The process of writing is accomplished in a          3. The stages of the writing process are over-
           step-wise, linear fashion, with managers and            lapping and recursive, with all team mem-
           technical staff planning the document, technical        bers offering advice and content at every
           staff and technical writers drafting it, writers and    phase: writers, editors and artists, for exam-
           editors revising and editing it, artists illustrating   ple, may offer outlines and graphics for
           it, and word processors and printers producing          story-boarding during planning; and technical
           final copy.                                             experts may participate in producing final
                                                                   copy through the use of desktop publishing
                                                                   software.

           4. Computer technology is used to automate              4, Computer technology is used to informate
           (monitor and manage time and costs).                    (allow team members full and fast access to
                                                                   company files).
                                Killingsworth,   Jones   = Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   327

    Against this background, we can now refine our description of the division of la-
bor and integrated team models to show how they work in technical communication.
Table 2 gives a summary.


A SURVEY OF TECHNICAL COMMUNICATORS
To get a better sense of how deeply entrenched the division of labor is in today’s in-
dustry and to chart the inroads cut by the alternative of the integrated teams model,
we conducted a survey of technical writers in various organizations.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
In general, our research questions were these:
     * How does a document progress through the planning, drafting, and revision
       phases; is the process linear, overlapping, or recursive?
     ¢ What kinds of personnel participate at each stage of the document preparation
       process?
     ¢ How does the training of the personnel affect their participation in the
       process?
     ¢ Is the process different for different kinds of documents?
     ¢ To what extent is the process automated or informated?
     ¢ To what extent is the process assisted by graphical techniques?
     e What are the employees’ attitudes toward their place in the process of docu-
       ment production?
     We begin with the hypothesis that the production process in industry is most fre-
quently modelled according to the division of labor along a linear path from planning
to drafting to revising and editing. We also expected that variations in the process
would depend upon the types of individuals (managers, technical experts, marketing
people, writers, editors, artists) involved at different stages in the process, the train-
ing of the writers and editors, the degree to which the process was automated, how
the process was managed, and the rhetorical and graphical techniques employed.
Finally, we expected, on the basis of our reading of the literature, that integrated
teams would be used most frequently in organizations that produced contract propos-
als and computer manuals for users.

Methods: Data Collection and Analysis

We developed a questionnaire to elicit information about the document produc-
tion process and the individuals involved (Figure 1). We asked the participants to
answer questions about the participation of various individuals in different stages of
document production, about the relation of the different stages of the process,
about automation of the process, and about the structure and management of the
process: We realized that, in labeling various stages of the process (“planning,”
“drafting,” and “editing”) or in providing descriptive terms for the flow of informa-
tion development (“linear,” “recursive,” “overlapping”), we ran the risk of biasing
our data. In all our questions, therefore, we left space for comments, hoping the rel-
                               Questionnaire on the Process of Developing Technical Documents

Return as soon as possible (no later than March 15) to:

Professors Jimmie Killingsworth and Betsy Jones
Department of English
Texas Tech University
Box 4530
Lubbock, TX 79409

            Check here if you would like a copy of the results of this questionnaire.
        Please give your name, title, and the name and address of your company, division, and/or organization.

 2:     Which form(s) of technical communication does your office often produce?
        Froposds==———aae                       Comment:
        Manuals (including computer documentation)
        Reports
        Ohe== =< =e               BRS      eS
 3F     What kind of personnel participates in each stage of document production (for example, technical writers,
        engineers/technical staff, editors, graphic artists, marketing staff, management)?
       Planning?
       Drafting (that is, early stages of writing)?
       Revising/Editing?

Comment:
  4.    Which stages involve teams of authors/editors/artists, and which are normally done by individuals?

                                                          individuals                                  teams
        planning
        drafting
         revising

Comment:
  5.     How automated is the process; that is, which stages are handled "on line" or in some way make use of word processors
         and other computerized equipment?
         planning ___                                     Comment:
         datin¢ =
         revising

         In which stages are graphics used as devices for organizing, illustrating, or replacing written text (in some organizations, for
         example, flow charts and other graphic devices play a significant role even in the early stages of planning)?
         planning —___                                     Comment:
         dating =e
         revising

         Which of the following term(s) best describe the writing process at your company or division?
                   linear (The process flows directly from planning to drafting, then back again, for example.)
                   recursive (Drafting begins while planning is still in progress, then back again, for example.)
                   incremental (All operations are completed on one section of a document before the next section is written.)
                   other (Please give term and definition):
         Who oversees and approves publication design?
         Who oversees, manages and/or controls the overall process of planning, drafting, revising, and publishing documents?
10.      How does the process vary as the type of length of document varies?
Ws       What kind of formal training in technical communication have you and your staff had? (Include degrees in technical writing,
         workshops, seminars, graduate courses, etc.)
         Please use the rest of this page (and, if necessary, the back of the page) to comment on any features that you think are
         unique in the way your company handles the process of document production.

Figure 1. Questionnaire used for data collection.
                               Killingsworth,   Jones   ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   329


atively simple check-the-blank questions would ignite an attitudinal response in
the comment section which would prove more valuable than a simple count of how
many organizations used division of labor versus how many used integrated teams at
the time of the survey.
     We sent the questionnaire to 120 technical writers whose names were taken from
the Society for Technical Communication’s directory of members. Sixty-five, a little
over 50 percent, responded, most with ample comments about their practice and
their attitudes. The moderate return is most likely due to the demanding nature of
the three-page questionnaire with its many requests for comments. One respondent
complained vigorously about the design of the questionnaire (while nevertheless sup-
plying us with extremely useful responses on her attitudes about her work).
     To analyze the data we collected, we tallied the responses and attempted to dis-
cern patterns within and among them. Some of the data could be quantified (see the
Results section below). But we were most lucky to receive many long responses in the
comments sections. These gave us insights not only into the structure of document
production, but also into the respondents’ perceptions and feelings about that struc-
ture. Such responses yielded less to quantification than to careful scrutiny and dialec-
tical interpretation in light of similar or vastly different responses. The “numbers”
elicited by the questionnaire often do little more than reinforce our common sense
about the profession. They are useful primarily in providing a context for the com-
ments and a means of locating and identifying the authors of the comments. We ask,
therefore, that our readers bear with us as we report this data, all the while realizing
that our real interest is the reporting and analysis of the rich comments our subjects
generously provided.



RESULTS
Of the 65 respondents, 16 (25%) were from companies involved in the computer or
electronics industries, and 24 (37%) worked for other private sector companies in-
volved in such fields as petroleum, agriculture, and consumer products. Eighteen
(28%) represented military or government organizations, including defense contrac-
tors. Four responses (6%) came from university research or publications departments,
and 3 (4%) were returned anonymously—with responses but without names, titles, or
addresses.
     Though the sample hardly represents all technical writing fields or indicates the
breakdown of types of industries employing technical writers, our responses do pro-
vide a representative cross-section of organizations and companies. Strongly techni-
cal and scientific, those organizations further suggest active bureaucracies—multiple
layers of departments and individuals that might participate in the document-pro-
duction process.
     Manuals and reports are the most commonly produced documents (45 and 39 of
the 65,.respectively), according to the respondents. A sizable number (23) reported
that they prepare proposals as well. The “other” forms mentioned show a wide array
of writing activity: brochures, marketing literature, journal articles, conference pa-
pers, newsletters, even speeches, maps, and videos.
330   Chapter 7 ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          Team Involvement at Different Stages of the Production Process
          We found that collaboration (specifically, team involvement) is the normal proce-
          dure at many companies, especially at the planning stage. The following shows the
          answers to the question, Which stages involve teams of authors/editors/artists, and which
          are normally done by individuals?
                                Plan          Draft      Revise
               Individuals       30             47         40
               Teams             30             i)

               Clearly, individuals are entrusted with significant duties. That drafting, in partic-
          ular, is an individual’s task demonstrates to some extent the independent nature of
          this stage of the writing process, even in complex and bureaucratic companies. In
          contrast, planning relies on such social activities as brainstorming, setting multiple
          objectives, and problem solving, just as revising and editing require satisfying multi-
          ple agendas.

          Participation of Different Discourse Communities
          at Different Stages
          The personnel involved in production, also a function of organizational nomencla-
          ture, suggests significant participation from a variety of people and groups. We asked:
          What kind of personnel participates in each stage of document production (for example,
          technical writers, engineers/technical staff, editors, graphic artists, marketing staff, manage-
          ment)? The results:
                                  P              D          R
               Writers            sy            40         40
               Tech. Staff        36            39         38
               Editors            13             9         26
               Artists             9             4          7
               Mgmt               27,            8         17
               Other              ie,            8         iS
           P (Planning), D (Drafting), R (Revising)
              These results suggest that it has become common for technical communicators to
          be involved throughout the production process and to interact with diverse groups
          and individuals. And the specific discourse communities begin to emerge as well: the
          engineering, scientific, and technical staff, artists, managers, and “others”—market-
           ing staff, auditors, product specialists, reviewers, quality assurance personnel, and
           users. Technical staff, specialists in various scientific and technological fields, join
           technical writers in participating in the full process more frequently than such other
           groups as managers, editors, and artists, few of whom create drafts.
                 We found that of the three stages in the writing process, drafting and revising
           take most advantage of word processors and other computerized equipment. In fact,
           the involvement of personnel may be a function of the level of automation; for
           processes that individuals rather than teams dominate, computers are used.
                 Not surprisingly, the responses from computer companies show significant use of
           word processors and other computer equipment. One respondent commented, “This
                                 Killingsworth,   Jones   = Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   331


place looks like hi-tech heaven to me. I haven’t seen a typewriter since | got here—
everyone who has a place to sit has a computer terminal, connected to a small printer
[and] a line printer, and has access to a QMS printer.”
     Still other responses suggest that the automation varies even among divisions
within an organization and is currently undergoing change. One respondent from a
large government laboratory indicated that only recently have a few editors begun to
edit on-line. In such organizations, where scientific authors have strong jurisdiction
rights, attempts to edit soft copy, even when a tracking system is used, can represent a
serious encroachment on territorial boundaries.


Graphics
In the answers to our question, In which stages are graphics used as devices for organizing,
illustrating, or replacing written text?, we learned that graphics are integrated during
planning, drafting, and revising, but especially the latter two. Yet the approach to
graphics varies significantly across and among individuals and organizations. A sam-
pling of responses:
      From a private company with significant military contracts: “Especially in ‘new
look’ manuals prepared for the U.S. Army, pictures replace text wherever possible.
User is less able to read than, say, a typical Air Force or Navy technician, so pictures
of every step are needed.” The implication, though not altogether clear, is that written
text no longer assumes a priority over graphics—in the process or in the finished
product.
      From a consumer products firm: “Wherever an illustration will increase clarity
and conciseness, it is used. Most frequently, editors determine where text might be
augmented or replaced.” Typical of many responses, this suggests a late introduction
of graphics into the writing process.
     From a free-lancer who produces manuals and marketing literature: “Graphics al-
ways come first in the material I produce. They are sketched, and constantly revised
during the generation of text until they evolve into a source of final artwork.” This is
one of the few responses that unambiguously showed a full integration of graphical
techniques in all stages of production.


The Writing Process Described

Our request to describe the company or division’s writing process yielded an interest-
ing response. We suggested four possible descriptive terms—linear, recursive, overlap-
ping, and incremental (plus other)—with the following definitions provided:
       Linear: The process flows directly from planning to drafting to editing, with perhaps a
    separate person or group in charge of each stage.
       Recursive: The process flows from planning to drafting, then back again, for example.
       Overlapping: Drafting begins while planning is still in progress, and so on.
       Incremental: All operations are completed on one section of a document before the
    next section is written.

     We also left open the possibility that more than one term might apply. Only
three respondents selected incremental; none suggested other definitions. But the re-
332   Chapter 7    8    Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          maining terms were identified in almost equal measure: linear 27, recursive 25, and
          overlapping 23.

          Supervision of Publication Design and the Publication Process
          Our question designed to yield information about the supervision, management, and
          approval of publication design as well as the overall process we left open-ended, and
          thus we received a variety of responses. We expected the responses to reflect the array
          of titles used among organizations, and indeed they did. Most indicated that a project
          manager or supervisor was responsible for overseeing the production process, but
          many listed editors or writers as well.
               We also expected most to indicate a single person or title, and there we were sur-
          prised with the results: Even where management and approval are involved, individ-
          uals such as a manager and editor or writer frequently share responsibility.
          Assignment of responsibility is also determined in some cases by the type of docu-
          ment under production. Interestingly, though, whereas engineers and technical staff
          were mentioned often when we asked who participated at which stage, few respon-
          dents indicated engineers’ participation in publication design or management of the
          entire process.
               Thus, collaboration does seem common in the management phase of document
          production, but the discourse community changes to include primarily writers, edi-
          tors, and project managers, the latter of whom seem to have writing, editing, and de-
          sign responsibilities. This finding supports the assertion of Killingsworth and Eiland
          that more and more often communicators rather than technical personnel are assum-
          ing broad managerial duties [14].

           Forma! Training in Technical Communication
          As a corollary to our questions about personnel who participate in the document pro-
          duction process, we asked, What kind of formal training in technical communication have
          you and your staff had? (Include degrees in technical writing, workshops, seminars, gradu-
          ate courses, etc.) The growing role of the communication professional, who must in-
           teract with members of many discourse communities, as well as the proliferation of
           college-level technical writing programs, piqued our interest in the writers’ training,
           if any. We hypothesized that staff members who had received formal writing training
           would identify more strongly with their organization “niche.”
                 The answers to the question varied enormously, as did the organizations, of
           course. Some respondents carefully listed each staff member and his or her training;
           others gave general comments. A sampling of responses:
                  e In general, we have had little formal training—less than 1/3 of our staff has
                       ever completed a [technical writing] class, except for in-house training, which
                       I conduct. All our writers have either a technical degree (EE or EET), or else
                    have equivalent experience in military schools or industry. All writers and edi-
                    tors require at least a bachelor’s degree.
                  e Peers’ educations vary—most were teachers and English majors—one is a
                    lawyer. I believe the science background gives an edge by giving you more
                    credibility in the eyes of the programmers, etc.
                                 Killingsworth,   Jones    = Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   333

     e All 18 of us have at least one degree (BA) in English or a related field.
    The following indicates the results (the number of staff members in the organiza-
tion with such training), to the extent that they can be quantified:
    English/Technical Communication degrees          36
    Technical/Engineering degrees                    16
    Journalism degrees                                 7
    Art degrees                                        2
    Business degrees                                   1
    Continuing education seminars & workshops        31
    Military or on-the-job experience                10
    Technical writing or graduate courses             8
    Thus, formal training—degrees in technical communication or related fields—is
common, and several respondents indicated that staff members hold master’s and
Ph.D. degrees in technical communication, English (in at least two cases, Ph.D.s in
literature), or other fields. Yet seminars and workshops (no doubt including those
sponsored by STC and ITCC) are also viewed as important vehicles for staff devel-
opment.
     These results indicate increasing specialization among communicators in indus-
try. The occasional defensiveness about qualifications demonstrates a perceived need
for specialized credentials, even if that need is self-imposed. And an increased need
for specialization by task goes hand-in-hand with intensified division of labor. But
technical expertise received in formal technical communication training might, on
the other hand, be viewed as an effective means toward enhanced collaboration and
team integration [23; 25].

“Uniqueness” of the Document Production Process
Finally, we requested, Please use the rest of this page (and, if necessary, the back of the
page) to comment on any features that you think are unique in the way your company han-
dles the process of document production. Granted, such an open-ended request (and the
last one on a three-page document, at that), is likely to be ignored. More than 40% of
the respondents declined to list any features unique to their companies.
    From the 60% who responded, however, some significant patterns emerged. Five
respondents suggested that a feature unique to their company is the important role of
the individual writer in shaping the entire document in consultation with other
members of a project team. In those cases, the writer is assigned or assumes responsi-
bility for a project and follows that project through all phases from planning to publi-
cation. The zesult is a wide range of style and quality. A respondent from a large com-
pany noted:
    Perhaps there is some uniqueness in the non-uniformity of style in our finished product. If
    you were to review a year’s output of tech manuals, you would be seeing the writing of
    about 25 different people. You would certainly note great differences in style, and be
    aware that there is a very wide range of writing abilities evident in the material we send
    out the door.
       _.. The reason we don’t take greater pains to ensure that the style of every manual is
    indistinguishable from every other is that our management and our customers do not
334   Chapter 7 #   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



              place great value on a uniform “company” style. The books we produce are essentially
              tools useful in operating and repair of specialized equipment.
               Three other respondents mentioned a similar but even more significant role for
          the writer on the product design team. These writers, all of whom indicated a high
          level of specialized training in technical communication, nevertheless demonstrated
          a significant degree of satisfaction in their contribution to product engineering and
          other tasks “outside” their chosen place in the division of labor. We will return to
          their comments in the discussion section below.
               In contrast, five other respondents suggested that the centralization of techni-
          cal communication in their companies is unique. In most of these cases, the techni-
          cal communication staff is responsible for almost all of the documents produced by
          the organization, an although they work with engineers and other writers and edi-
          tors through the process, their departments carry a document from planning to
          publication.
               Several who responded from small or developing companies, frequently in indus-
          tries experiencing change (such as computer-related firms), noted that the document
          production process is itself in a state of flux that matches the company’s own evolu-
          tion. As those companies and industries mature, so do their procedures for preparing
          manuals, reports, and other documentation. One respondent wrote: “When I started
          at this company, we did not have a formalized process. The process is evolving as we
          mature... . Planning, planning, planning is the key to good documentation. The writ-
          ing itself is the easy part.”
               Nevertheless, several other respondents—these from more established and bu-
          reaucratic companies—report extremely specific and unchanging processes. Three of
          them attached flow charts showing the paths from document inception to publica-
          tion, as well as the individual responsible for each phase along the way.
               Some who answered the final question used it to vent frustration with their com-
          panies’ policies or procedures. Reasons varied, however, including unhappiness over
          the scope of job responsibilities to the role of the writer amidst the technical staff and
          management. One (from a military setting) noted, “Powerful people within the bu-
          reaucracy impose changes in a document’s content that are harmful to the intended
          purpose. Frequently obfuscation is preferred over clarity. It takes both courage and
          diplomacy to create a good document. Usually the writer-editor is the only one sin-
          cerely interested in the poor reader.” Another said, “I can’t identify a formal ‘flow’ be-
          cause | don’t work with other professional communicators. | work with engineers and
          analysts, who draft reports, then ask me for help. I don’t think they plan; | think they
          modify boilerplate.”


          DISCUSSION
          This last question proved to be a key to the respondents’ feelings about the way the
          production process is handled in their companies. “Unique” became the word that
          the employees attached to something about their companies that they took pride in.
          On the negative side, the denial of “uniqueness” served to indicate dissatisfaction
          with the process. Following a scathing review of the inefficiency in his company’s op-
          eration, one respondent wrote: “Typical defense contractor publication operation!”
                                 Killingsworth,   Jones ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   335


This respondent marked “linear” as the best description of the writing process at his
organization.
      We might suggest that the three most frequently marked descriptive terms—
linear, recursive, and overlapping—are indexes of which model predominates in the
various organizations. A linear process indicates a strong division of labor, a recursive
process implies a high degree of integration and team interaction, and overlapping
stages in the process suggest an organization in transition between the two models or
an organization that draws upon both to some extent. Significantly, the strongest ex-
pressions of job satisfaction were associated with processes described as recursive and
overlapping, especially the former. Since the responses were very nearly equally di-
vided among the three descriptions, it is likely that an even distribution of the three
organizational patterns (division of labor, integrated teams, and transitional or
mixed) exists among the participants in our survey.
      Generally, however, we were surprised by the high degree of integration in the
process of document production. And the attitudinal findings related to this integra-
tion seem quite clear. When technical communicators are permitted entrance into all
stages of the process and are given the chance to approve or make publication deci-
sions and even to contribute to product design, they feel they are working at their
fullest creative potential. When they are closed out of one of the phases of the
process, they tend to be critical of their organization’s practice. For one respondent, a
member of a centralized technical communication operation, being out of touch with
design decisions meant that no such decisions occur: “There is no such thing as pub-
lication design at our company that I am aware of. Publications are managed by a
small technical publication section that is only interested in adherence to paragraph
numbering and meeting schedules.”
      Perhaps the key issue in the evolution of integrated production processes in-
volves the decision about whether to centralize the technical communication func-
tion. In the next section, we consider this problem at some length.

Centralized or Decentralized Technical Communication?

Centralized departments for technical communication usually support division of la-
bor by separating the revision, editing, and printing processes from the processes of
planning, researching, and writing of early drafts. Only one of our respondents sug-
gested that a centralized technical communication department was responsible for all
stages of the process, though some indicated that this might be the case for a few
kinds of limited publications—brochures, newsletters, and the like.
     Several comments indicate a recent move away from centralization in companies
that have tried the increased division of labor and have found it unsatisfactory. Thus
one respondent remarks: “This company recently underwent a reorganization. It de-
centralized all support functions, including technical communication. One result was
to eliminate the editing staff and give writers much more responsibility.” Typical of
the respondents in decentralized organizations, this writer described the flow of the
production process as “recursive.”
    Similarly, another respondent writes—
    Our company is unique in that the technical writers are on the software development
    staff, rather than in a separate department. .. . [The] programming staff is cooperative
336   Chapter 7    ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



               in teaching new systems and enhancements to technical writers, and in reviewing the
               writer’s work for technical accuracy. Also, the development staff calls on the writing
               staff for help in organizing menu displays, editing on-line help, editing prompts and
               comments, and presenting effective screen formats. ... We feel that our documentation
               procedures result in manuals which are both technically accurate and easily accessible
               to users.

               Decentralization, says one technical writer, with obvious pride, requires “self-
          starting traits and confidence in your own skills.”
               In the fullest statement we received on the integrated and recursive approach to
          the process of document production, one technical writer from a software develop-
          ment company said: “In our company the distinctions concerning who does what and
          when are not concrete. This situation may change from one document to the next.”
          In response to the question on uniqueness, she remarked—
               Though overall production plans are determined by management, the actual document is
               heavily shaped by the writer assigned to the project. After talking with a programmer, |
               provide an outline according to the organization that I feel best captures the material. |
               then can direct the amount and types of information | need.

              Having received the structured information, the writer drafts the document and
          continues consultation with the technical staff.
                  Other respondents indicate that editors as well as technical writers have begun to
           move out of the communication department, with the result that conflicts among dis-
           course communities are transformed into cooperative dialogue, a giving and taking of
           advice that can affect the document before it is “set in concrete.” One respondent
           writes—

                  The technical editor becomes a part of the design team very early in the project (more
                  than a year prior to release). As the product develops, the editor understands it and the
                  writing of documentation is a team effort. This eliminates most of the Engineer/Tech
                  Writer conflicts. It works well for us.

               Some organizations have taken a step half-way toward decentralization by retain-
           ing their technical publications department, but also making it possible for other de-
           partments and projects to claim an editor for their own. In one such organization,

                  Editors have principal responsibility for overseeing the publication. This includes all in-
                  teraction with the authors and establishing priorities and responsibilities for support
                  groups (word processing, graphics, printing, etc.). The editors also have lead responsibil-
                  ity for working with various departments; therefore, if, for example, the engineering de-
                  partment has publication questions, they will consistently deal with the same editor. The
                  approach increases the editor’s role, while developing a higher level of visibility for the
                  person actually doing the publications work.

                One editor who has worked in an organization like this provides a clear perspec-
           tive on her preferences:
                  I don’t work with the central publications organization [any longer]. | prefer to be
                  closely affiliated with a project so | know the scientists and become acquainted with
                  their field.... The editors in the central organization... can’t get familiar enough
                  with the subject to do substantive editing.
                                Killingsworth,   Jones   ® Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   337


     We thought that smaller companies would more likely use an integrated ap-
proach, but our findings show that size is not a major factor in this determination.
One writer from a very small operation complained about the rigidity of the process
and of role-assignments. And representatives from some of the largest organizations
in the country indicated substantial degrees of integration.
     Two facts demonstrate the high level of satisfaction among technical communi-
cators involved in organizations with an integrated process of document production.
First, none of the respondents from such organizations reported dissatisfaction.
Second, the length of these respondents’ answers to the uniqueness question is a fur-
ther index of their pride in their work. They consistently wrote the longest descrip-
tions of their companies’ practices. Most respondents from organizations with a heavy
division of labor wrote little or nothing in response to the question on uniqueness,
and of the three who did respond at length, two used the space to complain about
their organization’s structuring of the process.
      Despite the increasing use of the integrated process model in some companies,
and despite its potential for employee satisfaction, the entrenchment of the division
of labor deepens in many companies, as its most apparent symptom—increasing spe-
cialization—indicates. The most reliable index of this trend among our findings is the
proliferation of job titles, some of which are specialized enough to require new
words—like “formattist.” Many of these new specializations arise from technological
demands, as one of our respondents reports: “The severe. challenge of [an elaborate
text/graphics software system] has given rise to a new job classification—software
support engineer.”

The Limited Use of Informating Technologies and Graphics
It is ironic that a system for integrating text and graphics should produce greater divi-
sion of labor, for in theory such systems could provide high degrees of integration;
they should be, in Zuboff’s language, “informating technologies”; they should pro-
mote new methods of collaboration and interaction. But the respondent who reports
on the need for a “software support engineer” laments staff members’ “virtual enslave-
ment to the . . . computer system.”
    Indeed, our most surprising finding concerned the relatively minor, and occasion-
ally negative, effect that graphics and computerization have on the shape of the
process by which documents are produced. Only one of our respondents, for example,
mentioned the use of storyboarding as a means of opening up the process of planning
and drafting documents, even though the technique is widely advocated in the litera-
ture on technical writing. Our respondent definitely recognized the strong potential
for this graphical procedure: “We’ve done best on proposals for which we used the
storyboard technique, which calls for graphics to be planned at the outset.” More typ-
ical, however, is the respondent who reports that graphics are not considered until
late in the process: “Whenever an illustration will increase clarity and conciseness it
is used. Most frequently editors [in a process marked “linear”] determine which text
might be augmented or replaced [by graphics].”
     Only one respondent mentioned a serious transition toward the use of com-
puters to integrate the process of producing documents: “Some groups are begin-
ning to handle whole processes on line (PCs) from draft to printing final copy.”
338   Chapter 7    ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          Many respondents, especially those in computer companies, may have taken this
          procedure for granted; for, as we hypothesized, organizations that produce user
          manuals demonstrated the highest levels of team integration. With the advent of
          desktop publishing, however, we expected far more numerous comments on how
          computers have empowered groups of writers and researchers by giving them more
          control over the whole process of document production.


          CONCLUSION
          Though division of labor still dominates the practice of many companies, there is a
          perceivable trend in the management of technical communication toward what has
          become known in management circles as the “self-directed team.” The chief advan-
          tage of this arrangement, from the perspective of overall efficiency, is enhanced moti-
          vation and job satisfaction. Our findings suggest the reality of this effect, though
          whether higher quality products emerge as a result of higher motivation is a question
          we are not yet prepared to answer.
               Our findings also suggest the need for further research about the integrated teams
          approach in the types of organizations that, from the outlines provided by our survey,
          seem to have adapted it most fully—private sector companies, especially in the com-
          puter industry. An important question which we are not yet in the position to answer
          concerns the general applicability of the model; that is, beyond the question of
          whether it works, we must ask whether it works best in very particular settings and
          whether it can be applied elsewhere.
               We can suggest that, among the organizations represented in our survey and in
          the literature, the integrated process model of document production, in addition to
          enhancing motivation, may also increase desirable integration in three other areas:
                  1. Integration of employees from various discourse communities, which will
                     allow effective interchange and new opportunities for education and train-
                     ing. Our survey indicates that many organizations are currently realizing
                     this benefit.
                  2. Integration of a document with the product or service it describes. In a few
                     of the organizations we surveyed, this benefit has begun to accrue as, for
                     example, the writers of user manuals begin to contribute to the develop-
                     ment of online documentation and other human interface functions.
                  3. Integration of the different modes and styles of a particular document, the
                       most obvious example being the balance of written text with graphics. A
                       surprisingly few of our respondents seemed aware of the potential of infor-
                       mating technologies and graphics to achieve the objective of a fully inte-
                       grated communication.
               Managers of communication in various companies will no doubt be better able
           than we are to see the disadvantages of the integrated process model. From their per-
           spective, in a field where a high rate of turnover is the norm, one drawback will be
           obvious. As classic economic theory suggests, division of labor is effective because it
           allows for easy replacement of “interchangeable parts.” In short, it is much easier to
           replace a “formattist” than it is to replace a member of a “self-directed team.” From
                                Killingsworth,     Jones     8 Division of Labor or Integrated Teams   339

the perspective of the worker in a technical communication, however, this can only
be seen as an advantage.

References
     L H. Wayland     Cummings, Larry W. Long, and Michael L. Lewis, Managing
        Communication in Organizations: An Introduction, 2nd Edition (Scottsdale, AZ:
        Gorusch Scarisbrick, 1987).
      . In his famous historical work, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism
        (Trans. Talcott Parsons, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1958:182), Weber
        writes despairingly of the evolution of modern bureaucracy: “For of the last stage
        of this critical development, it might well be truly said, ‘Specialists without
        spirit, sensualists without heart; this nullity imagines that it has attained a level
        of civilization never before attained.”
      . Max Weber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology (Berkeley:
        University of California Press, 1978).
      . Ernest Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization (New York:
        Macmillan, 1933).
      . J. R. Hackman, and G. R. Oldham, “Motivation through the Design of Work:
        Test of a Theory,” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 16 (1976):
        260-279.
      . J. R. Hackman, “The Design of Self-Managing Work Groups,” in Managerial
        Control and Organizational Democracy, eds. B. King, S. Streufert, and EF E. Fredler
        (New York: Wiley, 1978), 61-89.
      . E. J. Poza and M. L. Markus, “Success Story: The Team Approach to Work
        Restructuring,” Organizational Dynamics 25 (1980): 3-25.
      . Robert Cole, “Work Reform and Quality Circles in Japanese Industry,” in Critical
        Studies in Organization and Bureaucracy, eds. Frank Fischer and Carmen Sirianni
        (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984), 421-452.
      . William    Pasmore,   Carole    Francis,   Jeffrey   Haldeman,   and   Abraham     Shani,
        “Sociotechnical Systems:       A North American Reflection on Empirical Studies of
        the Seventies,” Human Relations 35(1982): 1179-1204.
      . Rossabeth Moss Kanter, “Empowerment,” in The Leader-Manager,                 ed. John N.
        Williamson (New York: Wiley, 1986), 479-504.
      . Shoshana Zuboff, In The Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power
        (New York: Basic, 1987).
      . Mike Cooley, Architect or Bee?: The Human/Technology              Relationship (Boston:
       South End Press, 1980).
       Thomas E. Pinelli, Thomas E. Pearsall, and Roger A. Grice, “Introduction to
       Special Issue on Productivity Management               and Enhancement      in Technical
       Communication,” Technical Communication 34 (1987): 216-218.
   14. M. J. Killingsworth and K. Eiland, “Managing the Production of Technical
        Manuals: Recent Trends,” IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 29
        (June 1986): 23-26.
   Lots Shirley A. Anderson, “Managing through Automation,” in Proceedings of the
        33rd International Technical Communication Conference (Washington: STC,
       1986): 118-120.
   16. Robert Krull and Jeanne M. Hurford, “Can Computers                      Increase   Writing
       Productivity?” Technical Communication 34 (1987): 243-249.
340   Chapter 7    8   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



                  17: Terrell G. Manyak, “The Management of Business Writing,” Journal of Technical
                       Writing and Communication 16 (1986): 355-361.
                  18. Susan Dressel, J. S. Euler, S. A. Bagby, and S. A. Dell, “ASAPP: Automated
                      Systems Approach to Proposal Production,” IEEE Transactions on Professional
                       Communication 26 (June 1983): 63-68.
                  19. Hetty L. Proietti and Joyce L. Thomas, “Multifunctional Team Dynamics: A
                      Success Story,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Technical Communication
                       Conference (Washington: STC, 1988): MPD 58-MPD 60.
               20. Alice M. Dilbeck and               Laura A. Golowich,
                                                                     “Developing the Integrated
                   Documentation  Team,”               Proceedings of the
                                                                     35th International Technical
                       Communication Conference (Washington: STC, 1988): MPD 31-MPD 33.
               2a: Wendy Milner, “The Technical Writer’s Role in On-Line Documentation,” in
                   Proceedings of the 33rd International Technical Communication Conference
                       (Washington: STC, 1986): 61-64.
               Len Thomas R. Barstow and Joseph T. Jaynes, “Integrating Online Documentation
                       into the Technical Publishing Process,”                [EEE      Transactions    on   Professional
                       Communication 29(Dec 1986): 37-41.
                  25, Mark S. Smallwood, “Including Writers on the Software Development Team,” in
                      Proceedings of the 33rd International Technical Communication Conference
                       (Washington: STC, 1986): 387-390.
                  24. Susan L. Fowler and David Roeger, “Programmer and Writer Collaboration:
                      Making User Manuals that Work,” IEEE Transactions on Professional
                       Communication 29(Dec 1986): 21-25.
                  23% Joe Chew, Julie Jandel, and Anthony Martinich, “The New Communicator:
                       Engineering the Human Factor,” in Proceedings of the 33rd International Technical
                       Communication Conference (Washington: STC, 1986): 422-423.
                  26. Lee W. Wimberly,         “The   Technical          Writer    as a Member         of the Software
                       Development     Team:    A     Model        for   Contributing     More    Professionally,”     in
                      Proceedings of the 30th International Technical Communication Conference
                      (Washington: STC, 1983): GEP 36-GEP 38.
                  Zi Tim Bosch and Larry Levine, “Technical Communication and the Technical
                      Design Process,” Proceedings of the 32nd International Technical Communication
                      Conference (Washington: STC, 1985): MPD 28-MPD 31.
                  28. David Englebert, “Storyboarding—A Better Way of Planning and Writing
                       Proposals,”   IEEE   Transactions      on    Professional   Communication        15(Dec    1972):
                      115-118.
                  29. James R. Tracey, “The Theory and Lessons of STOP Discourse,” IEEE
                      Transactions on Professional Communication 26 (June 1983): 68-78.
                  30. R. Green, “The Graphic-Oriented (GO) Proposal Primer,” in Proceedings of the
                      32nd International Technical Communication Conference (Washington: STC,
                      1985): VC 29-VC 30.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of each model: division of labor and inte-
                grated teams.
             2. Compare and contrast the kinds of social space created by each model: division of labor
                and integrated teams. In particular, describe how the professional writer's work and orga-
                nizational role differ between the two models.
                 Johnson-Eilola, Selber           = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures                      341


   3. Killingsworth and Jones claim that “more and more often communicators rather than
      technical personnel are assuming broad managerial duties.” This claim suggests that pro-
      fessional writers, in more and more instances, have greater control in designing/shaping
      the social space of document project work, at least. Describe the kind of social space you
      would, in general, work to design, and outline what steps you would/could take to de-
      velop such a space. (Consider Killingsworth and Jones’ topic headings, like training,
      group/team formation, and writing process, as topics for creating possible “steps.”)
   4.Most people studying to be professional writers do not imagine themselves as also
      preparing to be managers, yet Killingsworth and Jones (as well as other articles within
      this collection) strongly suggest that a good part of a professional writer's work is man-
      agerial. Identify some of the managerial work for which professional writers might be
      responsible. Then, analyze how such managerial work involves professional writers in the
      production of social space.




                                   «                        CRPESESHEPERESTAHHEHREHE
                                                                         HOEK HHRERS SHS HABER HH ABSA


    FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
    Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
    Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
    lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
    in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
    the field itself.
    1. hypertext
    2. automating
    3. informating
    4. contraction
    5. expansion
    6. magic bullet theory
    7. articulation



    AFTER AUTOMATION:                                      HYPERTEXT
    AND CORPORATE STRUCTURES

    JOHNDAN JOHNSON-EILOLA
    Purdue University

    STUART A. SELBER
    Clarkson University


     arly claims for hypertext reveal some of the medium’s social and intellectual and
     revolutionary potential, but specific hypertexts often merely support and deepen
status quo, relatively hierarchical social and textual relationships. Because these texts
                                                                                                                 Electronic
Source: Johnson-Eilola, Johndan, and Stuart A. Selber. “After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures."
Literacies in the Workplace:   Technologies of Writing, 1996, pp. 115-141. Copyright 1996 by the National Council of
Teachers of English. Reprinted with permission.
342   Chapter 7 ®    Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          are seen as ways of automating existing patterns of work and control, they often act
          only to contract vital processes of communication. By thinking of hypertext as hav-
          ing the potential to expand communication processes, we might encourage a broad-
          based, positive shift involving not only new emphasis on the roles of the reader and
          writer, but reconsideration of the social situation and technology itself.
                  If a skilled typist could consistently turn out sixty words per minute, why
                  waste her time on filing or answering the telephone? A skilled typist was likely
                  to be kept in her job for as long as her employer could keep her there... .
                  It should be emphasized that there was nothing inherent to the typewriter
                  which compelled such an organization of clerical work. The typewriter, in
                  fact, can be quite useful for people who operate it sporadically. . . . The orga-
                  nization of work is largely determined by the efforts of businessmen and scien-
                  tific office managers to organize their clerical labor as profitably as possible,
                  and not to make the “inefficient” error of having a typist do work that a
                  lower-paid file clerk could just as easily do.
                                                              —Margerie W. Davies (1988, p. 34)

               In this chapter, we offer a general framework for complicating the relations be-
          tween various types of hypertext, corporate structures, and technical communication.
          We argue that commercial hypertexts, as they are currently constructed by technical
          writers, frequently tend toward automating and conserving traditional, hierarchical
          corporate structures and contracting the scope and importance of communication.!
          Although such forms of automation often constitute valuable improvements over old
          ways of work, an overreliance on the automation of communication activities often
          disempowers both users and technical communicators. The majority of our discussion
          centers on readers, rather than writers, of hypertexts in technical communication set-
           tings. We are convinced that the low value placed on the act of reading and using
           technical documents in the “automating” view of hypertext bears much of the burden
           for the parallel low status of the writers of such automatic texts. (Similarly, see
           Dautermann’s claim in this volume that users who underutilize computers “may de-
           value writing in general.”)
                We begin with a brief sketch of the current state of hypertext in business and in-
           dustry. Comparing historical conceptions of hypertext to the medium’s most popular
           current uses, we argue that some important and powerful aspects of hypertext have
           been left largely undeveloped or restricted to specialized sites and users. A large de-
           gree of this uneven development is due not to the isolated technology itself, but
           rather, to emphases on efficiency and short- over long-term profit and productivity
           in some versions of corporate and industrial cultures (see Wieringa et al., this vol-
           ume). Such dynamics are not in themselves repressive or disempowering, but often
           become so dominant that they override other concerns and spaces of action. In the
           final sections of this essay, we critique and attempt to extend distinctions Zuboff ar-
           ticulated between “automating” and “informating” technologies, highlighting im-
           portant social relationships and tendencies that influence the shape of communica-

           ! For discussions, see Burke and Devlin (1991); Horton (1990); and Barrett’s edited collections on hypertext
           (1988; 1989; 1992).
                Johnson-Eilola, Selber          © After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures   343


tion and communication processes. We offer a potentially profitable rethinking—
and necessary complication—of the relations among work environment, technol-
ogy, writer, and reader, as those concepts are embodied in hypertexts being produced
and used in corporate settings.


WAITING FOR THE REVOLUTION:
A HISTORY AND SURVEY OF HYPERTEXT
New technologies are commonly integrated into cultures in conservative ways,
strengthening rather than defying existing relations of social and political force
(Sproull & Kiesler, 1991; Marvin, 1988; Kanter, 1989). But the contemporary state of
hypertext contrasts sharply with the revolutionary potential prophesied by some of its
originators. Although hypertext has gained popularity in the last ten years, its history
goes back to at least the 1940s. In the pages of both the Atlantic Monthly and Life in
1945, Vannevar Bush wrote enthusiastically about his design for the proto-hypertext
“memex,” a machine the size and shape of an office desk.? To Bush, the memex repre-
sented a powerful tool for drastically improving human communication and, there-
fore, society in general: “Presumably man’s [sic] spirit should be elevated if he can
better review his shady past and analyze more completely and objectively his present
problems” (p. 1/54).
     Like Bush, later hypertext pioneers such as Ted Nelson and Douglas Englebart
sensed the failure of traditional print media to accommodate the ever-increasing and
ever-diverging tide of interrelated information, as well as the restrictions print media
placed on research and scholarships. Although Ted Nelson’s Xanadu remains more of
a conceptual than actual product, the influence of Nelson’s vision of hypertext re-
mains strong: a worldwide “docuverse” holding the interconnected web of all the
world’s literature—a category in which Nelson includes not only traditional works of
high culture but also popular literature, scientific work, and informal communication;
the system is designed to encompass any type of text (Nelson, 1982). In many ways,
the growing World Wide Web begins to approximate some of the functions features
of such a docuverse. Nelson (1990) envisions a simple royalty system for writers and
publishers (p. 2/33); because readers have the same authoring privileges as writers,
“publishers” can mean any users of the system interested in placing their own text in
the network (p. 2/42-43). And Englebart, speaking of the NLS/Augment system he
designed in the 1960s, characterized his version of hypertext as “the biggest revolu-
tion you had ever seen for humanity, in the sense of people being able to connect
their brain machinery to the world’s problems. And it was going to go on for many,
many decades” (cited in Englebart & Hooper, 1988, p. 27).
     What is most notable about these original versions of hypertext are the ways in
which the medium pointed toward a revolution in not only ways of writing and
reading, but also—and more important—profound social shifts. Although there are
certainly numerous theorists and designers today who remain committed to explor-
ing the use of hypertext in revolutionary ways, such uses are largely relegated to
computer-oriented research and development facilities (e.g., NoteCards at Xerox


2 For a fuller discussion of Bush’s career, see Nyce and Kahn’s edited collection (1991).
344   Chapter 7 «   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          PARC; gIBIS and rIBIS at MCC) or in some educational sites (e.g., the use of
          Storyspace, Intermedia, and some Hypercard stacks). In general, hypertext has been
          designed—and perceived—as a tool for increasing the simple, technical efficiency of
          existing print-based tasks rather than as a forum for transforming tasks in a broader,
          social sense—not only making a task easier or faster, but reconstructing communica-
          tion and work environments as well.
               One obvious presupposition of such a conservative approach is that hypertext
          versions of paper-based documents should be little more than faster, electronic ver-
          sions of original source text. Thus, these systems tend to encourage, in terms of de-
          sign, hierarchical indexing of topics mapped politically and cognitively to book tech-
          nologies. In terms of use, for example, these systems encourage browsing of indexes
          and existing connections between author-generated links (see, for example, online
          help in Microsoft Word or PageMaker), as opposed to less traditional, but perhaps
          more valuable, user-generated associative trails. Certainly, such traditional use of hy-
          pertext provides a valuable addition to the growing repertoire of technological aids
          that modern workers draw upon: more efficient retrieval of information represents an
          important investment for business and industry, especially as workers and users con-
          tend with increasingly large amounts of available information. But the capability of
          hypertext to virtually emulate other literacy technologies and dominant cultural
          forms can mold specific instances of this technology into well-worn channels of hier-
          archical control.
               Shoshana Zuboff’s critique of computerization in industry offers one important
          perspective in examining the reasons for technical communication’s concentration
          on making efficient, rather than transforming, traditional work practices. Zuboff
           (1988) defines two main methods of computerization in corporate sites: automating
           and informating. Automating technologies act to speed up the pace of work by trans-
           lating repetitive, predictable human activities (such as turning pages or locating
           cross-referenced material) into machine instructions. According to Ritchie (1991),
           such computerization strategies may tend to reinforce the traditional “logic of bu-
           reaucracy.” Informating technologies, in contrast, produce new information based on
           automated tasks. For example, a hypertext-based procedures manual for equipment
           maintenance might automate a maintenance       person’s navigation of an online text.
           Henderson (this volume) provides the useful distinction between improving on
           processes and on by-products: the types of automation frequently found in hypertext
           improve on the by-products but do not encourage users to rethink the fundamental
           processes in question. In this case, the user’s task has not changed in a substantial
           way. Informating texts provide users with new possibilities, but they do not (at least
           in theory) require specific uses of the new information they provide. Informating
           texts oscillate between cycles of automation and user control. So, in the hypothetical
           maintenance manual, the text could not only automate communication processes but
           also informate by offering the user additional information—suggesting alternate pro-
           cedures for maintenance, allowing users to communicate with other users in similar
           situations, providing historical tracking of the performance of the equipment in ques-
           tion compared with similar technologies or contexts, etc.
                A more specific example of informating technology comes from the aerospace
           industry, which is currently converting many of the paper-based technical manuals
           associated with its attack helicopters into electronic technical manuals (ETMs).
                 Johnson-Eilola, Selber = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures                        345


Although strictly automated paper manuals are, arguably, less useful during military
operations than paper-based manuals—they represent additional electronic equip-
ment that is not easily deployed or maintained in combat environments (Schnell,
1992)—informating versions of such manuals might prove useful. The new
Comanche attack helicopters (the RAH-66) will contain ETMs that provide vari-
ous access paths for maintenance or operational tasks. For example, “if a soldier’s re-
quest is in the form of a trouble code from the onboard diagnostics, the actual cor-
tective measures will appear on the screen along with the related logistics
procedures to update the aircraft logbook and requisition parts” (Schnell, 1992, p.
25). As this example illustrates, such an ETM could be considered informating in
that it highlights, for users, related information and suggested tasks. Notably, the
system merely poses secondary activities instead of completely automating the
process and removing control away from the user.
     Despite the seeming usefulness hypertexts, current workplace structures tend to
mitigate against the dispersal of control encouraged by such technologies (Schrage,
1990). As Zuboff (1988) notes, informating technologies seem to threaten traditional
hierarchical organizations because they encourage decision-making capabilities and
skills to move outward from centralized control; in other words, they foster net-
worked, rather than hierarchical, relationships (see also Kanter 1989; Drucker, 1988;
Reich, 1991; Hansen, this volume). Although scholars and researchers have proved
numerous examples of and arguments for informating-class hypertexts (VanLehn,
1985; Johnson-Lenz & Johnson-Lenz, 1992; Selfe et al., 1992; Johnson-Eilola, 1992;
Selber et al., 1996), such systems are largely relegated to corporate research and de-
velopment sites and educational institutions. Even World Wide Web browsers often
act only to automate activities such as looking up entries in a library card catalog. For
the most part, developers and users seem comfortable automating traditional tasks in
order to realize immediate and easily distinguishable increases in simple, technical ef-
ficiency. Such tendencies—which are understandable but should not be unquestion-
ingly accepted—have channeled the development of hypertext along relatively limit-
ing and limited paths. To more fully understand the reasons behind this uneven
development, we can examine the parallels between the hypertext and other tech-
nologies that were shaped by (and exerted shaping forces upon) the social environ-
ments from which they emerged.


CRITIQUING CATEGORIES: PROBLEMS
WITH AUTOMATE VERSUS INFORMATE
Some of the difficulty in classifying hypertexts as either automating or informating
stems from the fact that our distinctions between these two types appear, at this stage,
to be a feature of the technology disconnected from social use. Such a flaw hints at a
vague sort of technological determinism: the technology seems to determine its own



 3 The notion of agency remains problematic—but still productive—here because in one sense every user’s de-
                                                                                                         that any
cision takes place in a specific context and in a specific historical sequence. We do not want to assert
                                                                                                         interested
of the forms of text we discuss here ever offer a mythical high ground divorced from ideology. We are
in locating and  complicating   some  of the forces that silence other concerns.
346   Chapter 7 ® Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          use regardless of how a person uses the technology. To a degree, this is true: a hammer
          embodies certain possibilities, significantly different possibilities than does a screw-
          driver. For each technology there exists a range of possible uses. These possibilities
          are not completely determined by the technology but are mutually constructed in the
          nexus of both the technology and social situation (which are, themselves, complex
          and often contradictory constructions). A simple technology such as a mirror encour-
          ages one type of use in dressing rooms and quite another in high-energy optics. But in
          neither situation is the user able to freely substitute any other technology. The com-
          puter offers a particularly ambivalent technology, a “virtual” machine that can be eas-
           ily molded to emulate a wide variety of mechanisms (Feenberg, 1991; Bolter, 1991).
          Zuboff (1988), in discussing the ways in which computers can either empower work-
          ers or alienate them, depending on how the specific types of uses are constructed in
          differing environments, notes that

               In many cases, organizational functions, events, and processes have been so extensively
               informated—converted into and displayed as information—that the technology can be
               said to have “textualized” the organizational environment. In this context, the electronic
               text becomes a new medium in which events are both observed and enacted. As an auto-
               matic technology, computerization can intensify the clerk’s exile from the coordinative
               sphere of the managerial process. As an informating technology, on the other hand, it can
               provide the occasion for a reinvigoration of the knowledge demands associated with the
               middle-management function. (p. 126)

               The case appears more complex for technologies such as hypertext. The purely
          automating features of hypertexts are apparently the simple substitution of one tech-
          nology (the computer) for another (the book). But, as we have already illustrated,
          some uses and designs of computer technology begin to include an informating com-
          ponent differently from that of most books. The nature and shape of this transforma-
          tion—technological and social—is not frequently reflected upon in the use of hyper-
          text as an automating device. As Zuboff (1988) warns, “It is quite possible to proceed
          with automation without reference to how it will contribute to the technology’s in-
          formating potential” (p. 11). Likewise, Carolyn Marvin            (1988), in her historical
           analysis of electronic communication, argues that “[e]arly uses of technological inno-
           vations are essentially conservative because their capacity to create social disequilib-
           rium is intuitively recognized amidst declarations of progress and enthusiasm for the
           new” (p. 235). Frequently, especially in hypertext, both automating and informating
           aspects coexist. However, because the informating aspects are often not reflected
           upon or articulated, their shape and function can become absorbed by the current so-
           cial situation. That is, the automating features are touted and discussed, while the in-
           formating features are ignored or dismissed. The inertia of automation restricts the
           informating capacities to an invisible development along lines of preexisting forces.
           In addition, even in cases where hypertext informates work processes, the use of that
           new information may be restricted (used, for example, by management to track
           worker productivity and learning).
                The importance of context becomes apparent when we attempt to classify tech-
           nologies such as style-analysis or grammar-checking programs commonly included
           with word processors. For some users and contexts, these programs informate by ana-
                Johnson-Eilola, Selber        = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures                347


lyzing text and offering numerous possibilities that users can act on as they wish.
Other users in different contexts, however, may not possess the required skills, confi-
dence, or motivation to do anything but accept the program’s advice as correct. As
many writing teachers have found, users who are not already knowledgeable about
mechanical, stylistic, and rhetorical issues in a variety of discourses may use such pro-
grams in automating ways. In the same technology there exists the possibility for both
informating and automating uses. Similarly, the procedures software tool (PST) de-
scribed by Wieringa et al. (this volume), for example, would both automate and in-
formate the process of writing procedures.
     The possibility for both types of use with this technology does not mean that the
technology is itself neutral, only that there are multiple forces involved in the con-
struction of specific uses.
     From the standpoint of management, a primary difficulty that stems from infor-
mating aspects of a technology is the degree to which that technology might require
or even encourage skilled decisions on the part of workers. An automating technol-
ogy commonly represents an attempt to remove not only “drudge work” but also the
skill located in any one worker. For example, consider Harley Shaiken’s (1986) dis-
cussion about the introduction of numerical-control technology in machine shops
and an automatic turret punch press designed to stamp sheet metal parts based on
computer-tape instructions. The manufacturer of the punch press offered free training
courses to shop staff. Despite the interest in these courses expressed by the machine
crew, shop management allowed only “an engineer, a foreman, [and] an electrical
shop supervisor” to attend the free classes (p. 115). “As one worker commented later,
‘The work program is of great concern because it is being used as a basis for justifying
a removal of work... away from the sheet metal shop and into the hands of drafts-
men and engineers” (p. 115). Even when the work crew surreptitiously trained them-
selves in programming the machine—a capability resulting in higher-quality work—
management,         sensing    the encroachment            of worker      control     in the technology,
installed an override switch on the machine that prevented the workers from enter-
ing or modifying machine instructions (p. 116).
     On the surface, cases of automating hypertext seem very much different from the
numerical-control machines discussed above; hypertext does not appear to de-skill
workers in any substantial way.4 What has been automated are tasks such as turning
pages, retrieving manuals from bookshelves or distant sites, and discussions with col-
leagues sometimes necessary in troubleshooting or learning new procedures. In this
view, hypertext has improved the efficiency of day-to-day tasks in ways that most
workers would applaud. What has happened with common introductions of hyper-
text, however, is a general limitation of the informating aspects that are also possible
with this cechnology. In general, hypertext has been framed in strictly automating
terms, without reminders that the technology might also be articulated in ways that
can support technical communication of a different kind, working to expand rather
than contract processes of communication.



                                                                                                              us-
 4 Admittedly, one might complain that hypertext users may lose (or never gain) important skills related to
ing printed texts, but the loss of aptitudes such as dog-earing pages is of dubious importance.
348   Chapter 7   ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          REARTICULATING INFLUENCES: CONTRACTIONS AND
          EXPANSIONS OF COMMUNICATION
          At this point, it might be useful to rethink Zuboff’s terminology in a way that allows
          us to get at not merely the functional characteristics of an isolated technology, but
          also at the social and political context in which technologies are developed, used,
          maintained, and reconstituted. Instead of categorizing hypertexts as either one type
          or another on the basis of only concrete technological determinants, we need to
          broaden our scope and take apart the technology as it is used in order to look at the
          relations among the various elements. Although the automating/informating distinc-
          tion offers a useful starting point, what becomes primary (from our perspective) is not
          the specific characteristics of any one technology but how those characteristics are
          taken up, channeled, defined, and defied by people. Because most hypertext applica-
          tions possess at least some degree of informating capacity, our point is not that a cer-
          tain type of hypertext generates information while another merely automates
          processes. For those technologies that informate, what is done with that information
          becomes central. In other words, does a specific hypertext primarily contract or expand
          communication processes? Framed this way, we can rethink how this technology is used
          in social situations, noting the influences that traditional corporate structures can ex-
          ert over such uses. First, however, it may be useful to more fully define our terms.
               The distinction we want to make is based on two opposing views of writing and
          reading (activities that, in hypertext, sometimes begin to resemble one another).
          Technical communication theorists frequently construct similar categories (Dobrin,
          1989; Katz, 1992; Slack, Miller & Doak, 1993). In the first view, something we will
          call contraction, technical communication is a process of information transfer from
          sender to receiver based on the classic Shannon and Weaver model of communica-
          tion (1949). Communication in a contractive technology shrinks in conceptual/vi-
          sual size so that the link between sender and receiver is constructed as a frictionless,
          noise-free, and if possible, completely invisible wire. In this model, communication
          technologies are designed to increase accuracy of information reception and the raw
          speed at which information moves—in discrete, ideally unambiguous chunks—from
          writer to (relatively passive) reader.
               At the opposite end of the spectrum lies the expansion view, in which writing and
          reading are themselves modes of thinking, less information transfer than a continual
          process of constructing and deconstructing multiple, often contradictory meanings.
          Communication in this view is a social and political process rather than a mechanis-
          tic transfer of information packets.
               The contraction/expansion view represents a broad range of social and techno-
          logical possibilities rather than easy pegs on which to place specific hypertexts. An
           important difference between Zuboff’s automate/informate and our own contract/ex-
           pand is the idea that the production of information is continual in most work contexts
           (even if not apparently emanating from a specific piece of computer technology). We
           are attempting to widen the sphere of concern to include not only the discrete tech-
           nology (e.g., a specific database) but also the social construction of that informa-
           tion—a construction that, in part, determines how information can be used by spe-
           cific workers. Thus, “information” is not only object delivered to an end-user, but also
           recursive process taking in user, designer, technology, and context. In a different but
            Johnson-Eilola, Selber   = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures   349


related context (that of groupware), Johnson-Lenz and Johnson-Lenz (1992) have
observed the polarization that often develops between “mechanistic” and “open” sys-
tems of computer-based communication. As they warn, “[I]t is tempting to grasp for
easy answers—either tighter mechanisms of social control or its polar opposite—re-
fusal to make responsible choices. . . [T]he way forward reveals itself as a dynamic
balance’... ”.(p. 291),
     At the most contracted extreme, a text cuts off discussion and reflective think-
ing—the text offers, perhaps instantly, one, and only one, “correct” chunk of infor-
mation. At the most expanded extreme, the text offers no unqualified answers and a
huge number of navigational choices (but few hard and fast rules for users to distin-
guish which choice to make); an expansion medium encourages users to play out and
construct possibilities. The distinction here lies, however, not merely in the quantity
of data produced, but primarily in the social options opened for the circulation and re-
construction of that data by user-workers. We cannot equate the number of explicitly
available paths through a text space with the degree of “freedom” people have in us-
ing the text. The actual experience of reading the hypertext may still be relatively
contracted if a user’s current social situation requires or even strongly suggests a spe-
cific path. Consider, for example, someone using a phone book to look up a single,
predefined name and corresponding number: the phone book itself, as a concrete
technology, offers thousands or even tens of thousands of differing paths, but the cur-
rent user's context contracts those numerous possibilitiesto a single one. (This is not
 to say that phone books are oppressive, only that if someone claimed they repre-
 sented a general technological breakthrough with profound social and political impli-
 cations, we should be skeptical.) It is important to note that this contraction happens
prior to reading experiences rather than during the moment-by-moment process of
navigation that must occur in a temporal stream of reading and thinking. Thus, the
distinction between contraction and expansion lies in the dynamic convergence of
both social and technological forces.
      Currently, the more open type of text is most frequently found in experimental
fiction such as Michael Joyce’s Afternoon or Carolyn Guyer and Martha Petry’s Izme
Pass, texts that continually challenge readers to navigate and reconcile the postmod-
ern territories of collapsing subjectivity, indeterminacy, and complicity (see, e.g.,
Moulthrop, 1989; Landow, 1992; Douglas, 1991; Johnson-Eilola, 1994). We also see
examples of hypertext-based collaborative writing environments designed to support
both developmental and design work (Selber et al., 1996) and in some areas of the
World Wide Web (although, at least currently, the Web encourages browsing rather
than authoring for users in most contexts). Although few nonfictional texts reach the
extreme of experimental fiction, one might consider Jay David Bolter’s Writing Space
hypertext an example that tends toward expansion. Bolter’s text, based on an accom-
panying print text, integrates both a hierarchical structure and abundant extra-hier-
archical material. On the one hand, readers are encouraged to expand on the reading
patterns suggested by print texts, moving in and out of the structure in order to gain a
fuller (but never completely unified) perspective on the implications of Bolter’s argu-
ments. On the other hand, the text contains some elements that encourage an auto-
mated use—the hierarchy, for example, connotes hypertext as an automation of the
book. More important, although many theorists claim that hypertext readers should
always be able to also become writers, Bolter’s text is relatively closed, presenting a
350   Chapter 7 ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          situation that may signify to readers that the information is traveling in one direc-
          tion, from Bolter to reader (Johnson-Eilola, 1992; Amato, 1991; Tuman, 1992).
          Writing Space offers a mixture of contracting and expanding capacities that emerge
          differently, depending on specific actions of users. The importance of such oscilla-
          tions suggest that automation can and should be a crucial—but not sole—element of
          communication.
               As we have highlighted throughout, contracting/automating texts are the most
          popular applications of hypertext in technical communication. A naive explanation
          would claim that expanding texts are inefficient and offer little value to corporate
          users. But in conceptually and functionally contracting the processes of writing and
          reading—decreasing time spent in these activities as well as diminishing a sense of
          personal responsibility for the construction of meaning in both activities—corporate
          users face difficulties immediately evident on the surface. As we have already men-
          tioned, the contraction of writing and reading purchases much of its foundation from
          the outdated “conduit” theory of communication: that information passes, in packets,
          from sender to receiver. In this view, more efficient media—implicitly, “better” me-
          dia—are those that transfer the information packets with as little “noise” and as
          much speed as possible. Although this theory has been replaced by a host of more
          complex communication theories, the commonsense view of the conduit model con-
          tinues to exert great influence over day-to-day operations in technical communica-
          tion environments: the popularity of hypertext that emulates the book (and also at-
          tempts to construct virtual books as a transparent medium) testifies to its continuing
          survival.
               From the perspective of readers, the drawbacks to the conduit model seem signif-
          icant. For example, little responsibility is given to the reader’s role in constructing
          meaning. Because the information in this view is actually constructed by the author,
          only “carried” by the medium and “received” (passively) by the reader, only the au-
          thor can bear responsibility for the effectiveness of a message—a situation high-
          lighted in the term often used for this model, “the magic bullet theory.” The writer
          constructs a bullet and shoots it at the reader; if the bullet misses its mark, it is be-
          cause the writer constructed an ineffective bullet, chose a poor weapon, or aimed
          sloppily or at the wrong target. The violent nature of this model aside, readers are im-
          plicitly discouraged from assuming any real responsibility or credit for their readings
          in a contracting medium. This perspective is supported by the current Society for
          Technical Communication’s Code for Communicators, where writers are mandated
          to make meaning of texts for readers.
              In contrast to this view is perhaps the most unique potential of hypertext as it
          was defined by early thinkers: it increases the power of users because they actively
          make navigational decisions in the act of reading. This tension is resolved, however,
          in automatic uses of hypertext when readers internalize another system of control,
          that of their work. Although information is being produced, the social context of the
          information production constructs a very contracted range of possibilities. In an ex-
          panding medium, however, readers might be encouraged to consider such matters as
          the possibility of multiple (even conflicting) interpretations or views in the text, the
          accuracy of the information, or the ideological agendas of the technology, the author,
          or the task.
                 Johnson-Eilola, Selber        = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures             351

      In addition, the contraction inherent in the information transfer model is dis-
tributed unequally across job classes. As Harry Braverman (1974) argues,

      The recording of everything in mechanical form, and the movement of everything in a me-
      chanical way, is. . . the ideal of the office manager. But this conversion of the office flow into
      a high-speed industrial process requires the conversion of the great mass of office workers
      into more or less helpless attendants of that process. ... The number of people who can op-
      erate the system, instead of being operated by it, declines precipitously. In this sense, the
      modern office becomes a machine which at best functions only within its routine limits, and
      functions badly when it is called upon to meet special requirements. (p. 348)

     Historically, automation has displaced work at the lowest levels of responsibility
and social class: the forms-processing tasks normally completed by office clerks
(Zuboff, 1988, pp. 133-159; Machung, 1988); the sewing and mending performed by
women (Kramarae, 1988); the hands-on skills of the pulp-mill operator (Zuboff,
1988; Hirshhorn, 1984); and the traditionally female task of housework (Leto, 1988).
Frequently, when workers are not completely displaced from their work in such situa-
tions, they find that they are now both isolated from co-workers and also expected to
substantially increase their output (normally without corresponding increases in
pay). The association of automating or contracting tasks with decreased responsibil-
ity and increased stress is not guaranteed, but often constructed by hierarchical, effi-
ciency-driven structures of many workplaces. Thus, hypertext takes its place in this
history of technological efficiency as a way of stream-lining the processes of reading
and writing, contracting the activities to the point of disappearance or, at best, low
significance.
     Our critique to this point may appear overly pessimistic: currently, hypertext
does not seem to portend the massive automation and de-skilling that accompanied
technologies such as the automotive assembly line. But as hypertext becomes more
popularly conceived of as a technology that transfers information and contracts com-
munication, it becomes less likely that hypertext will be developed along expansive
lines, especially for those classes of workers (such as the clams clerks discussed by
Zuboff or many writers in corporations) whose tasks often fall under the totalizing
goal of easy efficiency.?

REASSERTING RESPONSIBILITY: OPPORTUNITIES
FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATORS
Despite frequent claims for hypertext in general, the popular online documentation
form of this technology (often the epitome of the contracting class) does not neces-
sarily move control from author to reader, but may in fact begin moving control away
from both parties and into the machine/technology itself. In this way, hypertext fol-


 5 We wauld argue, somewhat egotistically, that academic and especially humanistic uses of hypertext fre-
quently break free of these constraints because of the community's relatively greater emphasis on increasing
personal development and acceptance of postmodern positions on unity, truth, and subjectivity. As we describe
elsewhere (Selber et al., 1996), theoretical and pedagogical positions from fields such as composition offer an
important perspective on the use of writing and reading technologies in corporate sites.
352   Chapter 7 *   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          lows in the footsteps of other de-skilling technologies that were used by managers to
          translate operator knowledge into computers in order to exercise more complete con-
          trol over information processes and products (Shaiken, 1986; Zuboff, 1988;
          Hirschhorn, 1984). Paradoxically, then, from the perspective of technical communi-
          cators, the activity of writing is not the construction of meaning but often the at-
          tempt to render their own positions transparent—functional texts should ideally
          transmit meaning directly from technology to user. Even more complex views of com-
          munication, such as the translation theory of communication, in which writers trans-
          late technical material into lay terms, tend to ignore the fundamentally political na-
          ture of the balance of power inherent in the relations among             writer,   reader,
          technology, and work environment (Slack, Miller, &@ Doak, 1993).
               In recognition of this diminution of importance, we call on technical communi-
          cators to begin reconceiving the broadly political influence exerted through their role
          in the process of communication. Although assuming such a responsibility is never
          simple or expedient—and often, given the traditionally low status of technical writ-
          ers in industry relative to scientists and engineers, such an assumption is potentially
          dangerous—technical communicators must begin to slowly, but purposefully, recog-
          nize both contracting and expanding forms of hypertext. Technical communicators
          might, for instance, begin offering end-users the capability to not only “receive” in-
          formation from the hypertext, but also to become full-fledged authors capable of
          adding their own links and nodes to texts. (Tentative forms of these capabilities can
          be found in the bookmarking facilities of recent online help documents and in World
          Wide Web browsers such as Netscape and Mosaic.) Such a facility would not only in-
          crease the importance of both writers’ and readers’ interactions with the text, but,
          perhaps more important, can be connected to management’s concerns for efficiency
          and flexibility. Users can customize systems so that they are more effective (in the
          broad sense of the term) in their specific situations.
               Other approaches to thinking about text and meaning provide technical commu-
          nicators with possibilities for increasing their own responsibilities in the communica-
          tion process. Articulation theory, a movement generally attributed to the cultural
          criticism of Stuart Hall (1985), represents an attempt to explain and act upon the
          complex political/power relationships between language and culture. In this perspec-
          tive, meaning is constructed in varying ways, depending on both object and social sit-
          uation; differing environments engender different articulations. The concept of artic-
           ulation offers technical communicators a powerful method for reconstituting the
           shape and relevance of communication in corporate and industrial sites, giving new
           importance and responsibilities to the roles and activities involved in writing and
           reading (Slack, Miller, & Doak, 1993). As a brief example, consider the case of a
           technical writer who might define her position of “writer” as “the creator of docu-
           ments that make technology easier for novices to use.” In this articulation, the term
           writer is connected or articulated to a number of culturally powerful concepts that af-
           fect and partially construct the meaning of the term: “writer” can be easily seen as ar-
           ticulated to terms such as “transparency,” “information/knowledge transfer,” “eff-
           ciency,” and “clarity.”
                Dominant articulations such as these frequently organize or reinforce social rela-
           tions as hierarchical structures; those at the top of these structures are frequently
           able, through various coercive and ideological means, to enforce articulations that
            Johnson-Eilola, Selber   = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures   353


more deeply entrench unequal power relations. As such, participants continually
struggle over the dominant and subordinate articulations (Hall, 1985; Grossberg,
1986; Grossberg & Slack, 1985; Hebdige, 1988). As our foregoing discussion has
shown, the automating or contracting orientation of many functional hypertexts
tends to articulate both “reader” and “writer” to positions of low power—teaders be-
ing passive receivers of information, and writers, at best, being possessed with the
knack for allowing some “true” meaning of a technological problem to flow through
themselves, into computer memory, from there to the reader’s brain. The process of
communication contracts, in this articulation, to become a mere function, a compo-
nent necessary for technological use but not of great importance (except when it
fails). From this perspective, engineers and scientists—those who actually created the
concrete technology—have the most power; technical communicators, as well as
readers and users, are somewhat like acolytes.
    But, as Jennifer Slack, David Miller, and Jeff Doak (1993) argue, “technical com-
municator” can also be articulated, with some effort, as “author’—a person of rela-
tively greater prestige, responsibility, creativity, and power. The approach of the artic-
ulation view itself also suggests a much stronger articulation for reader—no longer a
box into which meaning is put, but now the person who constructs meaning (albeit
under some strong constraints). This transformation in many ways parallels the dis-
tinctions we have made between contracting and expanding forms of hypertext: by
articulating hypertext to this new, empowered relationship, both writers and readers
might be able to resist efficiency as an overriding articulation (although probably it
will always be one of many articulations exerting force). Hypertext can be articulated
in an expansive way to embrace the active construction of meaning in communica-
tion by a whole environment of interconnected agencies: “From sender through
channels and receivers, each individual, each technology, each medium contributes in
the ongoing process of articulating and rearticulating meaning” (Slack, Miller, &
Doak, 1993).
     The difficulty for writers and readers of hypertext in corporate settings lies in the
tenacity of the dominant articulation, efficiency (which is itself complexly articu-
lated in terms of simple, technical/mechanical expediency). As we have shown, it is
more likely that upper and middle management will integrate hypertext in a conserv-
ative way, one that not only resists change, but, in fact, deepens the articulation of
communication as contraction by speeding up the frames of access and the ease with
which information can be “received” instead of “constructed.” But the opportunity
exists for a different articulation, one of mutual activity and influence, especially if
technical communicators can discover ways in which expansive hypertexts might
construct a different meaning for their own positions, perhaps one of increased re-
sponsibility and power within an organization.



FINDING COMMON GROUND: CONVERGENT GOALS FOR
TECHNICAL COMMUNICATORS AND CORPORATIONS
Even though corporations and their employees sometimes work at cross-purposes, ex-
panding hypertexts can be productively articulated to each group. Technical commu-
nicators might find that this form of hypertext grants them a higher degree of respon-
354   Chapter 7 #® Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          sibility and prestige, but these increases do not necessarily come at the expense of the
          corporation. The major impediment to getting corporations to understand the bene-
          fits (of what is obviously a more complex approach to text and communication) is in
           convincing managers       and administrators to recognize the need for new corporate
           structures and strategies. Robert Reich (1991), for example, notes the ways in which
           organizations are shifting from high-volume enterprises (prioritizing hierarchical
           managerial structures and automation) to high-value enterprise (encouraging net-
           worked social structures and flexibility and mobility). Overly rigid hierarchical struc-
           tures, one-way communication, and simple efficiency may be detrimental to deeper
           concerns such as innovation, market growth, and long-term financial (if not struc-
           tural) stability. According to Peter Drucker (1988) and many others, old ways of do-
           ing business are no longer adequate within today’s and tomorrow’s global market.
                In this light, contracting hypertext represent what might be a limiting holdover
           from print technologies, automated factories, and rigid corporate structures.
           Designers who construct hypertexts that primarily automate or contract existing pa-
           per-based activities presuppose that users want an online text that operates identi-
           cally to its print-based counterpart, only faster; what is missing is the idea that such a
           text might offer a completely new range of textual possibilities. Hypertext as infor-
           mating or expanding—the original vision of Bush, Nelson, and Englebart—may be-
           come more common as the social and political situations in which it is used and de-
           veloped begin to change. As work processes and products become increasingly
           integrated and collaborative, hypertexts may begin to resemble Nelson’s Xanadu or
           Englebart’s oN-Line System (NLS).
                The need for such an expanding construction of hypertext is being expressed in
           projects such as the Virtual Notebook System (VNS) at Baylor College of Medicine.
           In the VNS project, the architecture of the system is specifically designed to “en-
           hance information sharing among scientists” (Burger et al., 1991, p. 395). And for
           engineers and systems designers at Boeing, the need arises as workers collapse the
           common distinctions that programs such as Hypercard make between writers and
           readers (or authors and browsers) into interdisciplinary teams. Collapsing such cate-
           gories is important at Boeing because “[e]ach engineer contributes a unique perspec-
           tive to the design of a product and its processes. The information they create is inter-
           related and these interrelationships must be represented in the data” (Malcolm et al.,
           1991, p. 14).
               Hypertexts that primarily contract communication processes often mirror con-
           servative corporate structures and practices and reinforce hierarchical business oper-
           ations; those that mainly expand (and there are fewer of these) hold the potential to
           make qualitative changes within a corporation, down to the level of individual
           worker. We might assume, therefore, that as corporations begin adopting new struc-
           tures and strategies for competing in the global marketplace, parallel shifts will oc-
           cur in their use of technologies such as hypertext. The move from “data” to “infor-
           mation” projected by Drucker (1988, p. 46) parallels what Kanter sees in
           “postentrepreneurial”     corporations,   corporations   responding to competitive   pres-
           sures by implementing the following five changes in how they organize and conduct
           business (1989, p. 88):
             Johnson-Eilola, Selber   = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures   355


     1. A greater number and variety of channels for workers are available to take
          action and exert influence.
     ie)- Relations of power shift from vertical to horizontal
                                                               (from chains of com-
        mand to peer networks).
       . Distinctions between managers and those managed diminishes.
       . External relations are increasingly important sources of internal power and
     ast
         influence.
     5. As a result of the first four changes, career development of workers is less
         intelligible but also less circumscribed.
    These changes within modern organizations may encourage more expanding, as
opposed to contracting, uses of hypertext. In addition, these changes may allow tech-
nical writers to take more active roles in corporate communication processes, as pro-
posed by the articulation model previously discussed.
     One difficulty with much of the writing on postentrepreneurial approaches is the
way in which they frame causality: Frequently, corporations such as Boeing come to
recognize the value of new approaches to technology because the corporate structure
and strategies have already shifted and now require new ways of communicating. We
argue that such transformations can occur in parallel, new visions of the technology
driving corporate development and vice versa. However, management is not often
situated in a position that encourages seemingly radical changes. From a conservative
standpoint, it appears there is little to gain. But technical communicators have a
higher stake in this potential transformation: expanding hypertext not only places
more value on the role of writer and reader, but also might help drive shifts in corpo-
rate structure at large that also increase the perceived value of new, expanding meth-
ods of communication, not merely in documentation but in all phases of corporate
life. As Henrietta Shirk (1988) argues, even the shift from paper to online documen-
tation, which arose from efficiency-based needs,

    requires changes in how technical communicators function in organizations that produce
    successful online documentation and perhaps even in how these organizations are inter-
    nally structured. These changes in turn raise important issues about the professional
    preparation and development of online documentors. (p. 321)

     The next stage of hypertext may afford technical communicators with opportuni-
ties to address these issues. Certainly, no single technical communicator can initiate
sweeping changes in a multinational conglomerate. But possibilities exist, particu-
larly in corporations that might already be considering change but are not completely
convinced. By articulating hypertext as supporting both contractions and expansions
in hypertext use, technical communicators can construct all aspects of communica-
tion as constructive, social activities

References
    Amato, J. (1991). Review of writing space: The computer, hypertext, and the history
       of writing. Computers and Composition: A Journal for Writing Teachers, 9(1),
       111-117.         ;
356   Chapter 7 ® Professional Writers Produce Social Space



               Barrett, E. (Ed.). (1988). Text, context, and hypertext: Writing with and for the computer.
                  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
               Barrett, E. (Ed.). (1989). The society of text: Hypertext, hypermedia, and the social con-
                  struction of information. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
               Barrett, E. (Ed.). (1992). Sociomedia: Multimedia, hypermedia, and the social construc-
                   tion of knowledge. Cambridge: MIT Press.
               Bernstein, M. (1988). The bookmark and the compass: Orientation tools for hyper-
                   text users. ACM SIGOIS Bulletin, 9, 34-45.
               Bolter, J.D. (1991). Writing space: the computer, hypertext, and the history of writing.
                  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
               Brand, S. (1987). The media lab: Inventing the future at MIT.               New York: Viking/
                  Penguin.
               Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and monopoly capital: The degradation of work in the twen-
                  tieth century. New York: Monthly Review Press.
               Brown, P.J. (1987). Turning ideas into products: The guide system. In Hypertext ’87
                  proceedings (pp. 33-40). Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, Association
                  for Computing Machinery.
               Burger, A.M., Meyer, B.D., Jung, C.P.           & Long, K.B. (1991). The virtual notebook
                  system. In Third ACM Conference on Hypertext proceedings (pp. 395-401). San
                  Antonio, TX: Association for Computing Machinery.
               Burke, E., & Devlin, J. (1991). Hypertext/hypermedia handbook. New York: McGraw-
                  Hill.
               Bush, V. (1945/1987). As we may think. In T. Nelson (Ed.), Literary machines (pp.
                  1/39-1/54). South Bend, IN: The Distributors.
               Carlson, P.A. (1988). Hypertext: A way of incorporating user feedback into online
                  documentation. In E. Barrett (Ed.), Text, context, and hypertext: Writing with and
                  for the computer (pp. 93-110). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
               Charney, D. (1994). The impact of hypertext in processes of reading and writing. In
                  C.L. Selfe & S.J. Hilligoss (Eds.), Literacy and computers: The complications of teach-
                  ing and learning with technology (pp. 238-263). New York: Modern Language
                  Association of America.
               Cohen, N.E. (1991). Problems of form in software documentation.                     In T.T. Barker
                  (Ed.),   Perspectives   on   software    documentation:    Inquiries   and     innovations    (pp.
                  123-136). Amityville, NY: Baywood.
               Conklin, J. (1987, September).             Hypertext:   An   introduction       and survey.     [EEE
                  Computer, 17-41.
               Davies, M.W. (1988). Women clerical workers and the typewriter. The writing ma-
                  chine. In C. Kramarae (Ed.), Technology and women’s voices: Keeping in touch (pp.
                  29-40). New York: Routledge.
               Dobrin, D.N. (1989).        Writing and technique.       Urbana,    IL: National       Council     of
                  Teachers of English.
               Douglas, J.Y. (1991). Understanding the act of reading: The WOE beginner’s guide to
                  dissection. Writing on the Edge, 2(2), 112-125.
               Drucker, P.F (1988, January/February). The coming of the organization. Harvard
                  Business Review, 45—53.
        Johnson-Eilola, Selber     = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures   357

Eisenstein, E. (1983). The printing revolution in early modern Europe. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Englebart, D., & Hooper, K. (1988). The Augmentation System Framework. In S.
   Ambron & K. Hooper (Eds.), Interactive multimedia (pp. 15-31). Redmond, WA:
   Microsoft.
Feenberg, A. (1991). Critical theory of technology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grossberg, L. (1986). History, politics and postmodernism: Stuart Hall and cultural
   studies, Journal of Communication Inquiry, 10(2), 61-77.
Grossberg, L., & Slack, J.D. (1985). An introduction to Stuart Hall’s essay [Essay intro-
   duction to Hall, “Signification.”]. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 2, 87-90.
Hall, S. (1985). Signification, representation, ideology: Althusser and the post-struc-
    turalist debates. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 2, 91-114.
Hebdige, D. (1988). Hiding in the light. On images and things. New York: Routledge.
Hirschhorn, L. (1984). Beyond mechanization: Work and technology in a postindustrial
   age. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horton, W.K. (1990). Designing and writing online documentation: Help files to hyper-
    text. New York: Wiley.
Johnson-Eilola,   J. (1992).   Structure   & text: Writing space   and STORYSPACE.
   Computers and Composition: A Journal for Teachers of Writing, 9(2), 95-129.
Johnson-Eilola, J. (1994). An overview of reading and writing in hypertext: vertigo
   and euphoria. In C.L. Selfe & S.J. Hilligoss (Eds.), Computers and literacy: The
   complications of teaching and learning with technology (pp. 119-219). New York:
   Modern Language Association of America.
Johnson-Lenz, P., & Johnson-Lenz, T. (1992). Postmechanistic groupware primitives:
   Rhythms, boundaries, and containers. In S. Greenburg (Ed.), Computer-supported
   cooperative work and groupware (pp. 271-293). San Diego: Harcourt Brace
   Jovanovich.
Kanter, R.M. (1989, November/December). The new managerial work. Harvard
    Business Review, 85-92.
Katz, S.B. (1992). The ethic of expediency: Classical rhetoric, technology; and the
    holocaust. College English 54(3), 255-275.
Kramarae, C. (Ed.). (1988). Technology and women’s voices: Keeping in touch. New
   York: Routledge.
Landow, G.P. (1992). Hypertext: The convergence of contemporary critical theory and
   technology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Leto, V. (1988). ‘Washing, seems it’s all we do’: Washing technology and women’s
   communication. In C. Kramarae (Ed.), Technology and women’s voices: Keeping in
   touch (pp. 161-179). New York: Routledge.
Machung, A. (1988). ‘Who needs a personality to talk to a machine”:
   Communication in the automated office. In C. Kramarae (Ed.), Technology and
   women’s voices: Keeping in touch (pp. 62-81). New York: Routledge.
Malcolm, K.C., Poltrock, S.E., & Shuler, D. (1991). Industrial-strength hypermedia:
  Requirements for a large engineering enterprise. In Third ACM Conference on
  Hypertext proceedings (pp. 13-24). San Antonio, TX: Association for Computing
  Machinery.
358   Chapter 7    *    Professional Writers Produce Social Space



              Marvin, C. (1988). When old technologies were new: Thinking about electronic communi-
                 cation in the late nineteenth century. New York: Oxford University Press.
              Moulthrop, S. (1989). In the zones: Hypertext and the politics of interpretation.
                       Writing on the Edge, 1(1), 18-27.
              Nelson, T.H. (1982).            A new home for the mind. Dafamation, 28, 168-180.
              Nelson,        T.H.   (1987).     Computer   lib/dream   machines.   2nd   ed.   Redmond,   WA:
                       Microsoft.
              Nelson, T.H. (1990). Literary machines 90.1. Sausalito: Mindful Press.
              Nielsen, J. (1990). Hypertext and hypermedia. Boston: Academic Press.
              Nyce, J.M., & Kahn, P. (1991). From memex to hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the mind’s
                       machine. New York: Academic Press.
              Parsaye, K., Chignell, M, Khoshafian, S., & Wong, H. (1989). Intelligent databases.
                 New York: Wiley.
              Raymond, D.R., & Tompa, EW. (1987). Hypertext and the new Oxford English
                 Dictionary. In Hypertext ’87 proceedings (pp. 143-153). Chapel Hill: University of
                 North Carolina, Association for Computing Machinery.
              Reich, R.B. (1991). The work of nations: Preparing ourselves for 21st-century capitalism.
                 New York: Knopf.
                  Ritchie, L.D. (1991). Another turn of the information revolution. Communication
                     Research, 18(3), 412-427.
                  Schnell, W.J. (1992). Automated technical manuals. Army aviation, 41(2), 24-25.
                  Schrage, M. (1990). Shared minds: The new technologies of collaboration. New York:
                       Random House.
                  Selber, S.A., McGavin, D., Klein, W., & Johnson-Eilola, J. (1996). Issues in hyper-
                      text-supported collaborative writing. In A.H. Duin & C.J. Hansen (Eds.),
                      Nonacademic writing: Social theory and technology (pp. 257-280). Hillsdale, NJ:
                      Erlbaum.
                  Selfe, R.J., et al. (1992). Online help: Exploring static information or constructing
                      personal and collaborative solutions using hypertext. In SigDoc ’92 Conference pro-
                      ceedings (pp. 97-101). Ottawa: Association for Computing Machinery.
                  Shaiken, H. (1986). Work transformed: Automation and labor in the computer age.
                      Lexington, KY: Lexington Books.
                  Shannon,     C.E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication.
                       Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                  Shirk, H.N. (1988). Technical writers as computer scientists: The challenges of on-
                       line documentation. In Edward Barrett (Ed.), Text, context, and hypertext: Writing
                     with and for the computer (pp. 311-327). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                  Slack, J.D., Miller D.J., @ Doak, J. (1993). The technical communicator as author:
                     Meaning, power, authority. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 7(1),
                      12-36.
                  Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked
                     organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                  Tuman, M. (1992). Rev. of Bolter, “Writing                space.” College Composition    and
                       Communication, 43(2), 261-263.
            Johnson-Hilola, Selber      = After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate Structures       359


   VanLehn, K. (1985). Theory reform caused by an argumentation tool. Report ISL-11.
      Palo Alto: Xerox, PARC.
   Walker, J.H. (1987). Document examiner: Delivery interface for hypertext docu-
      ments. In Hypertext ’87 proceedings (pp. 307-323). Chapel Hill: University of
      North Carolina, Association for Computing Machinery.
   Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine: The future of work and power. New
      York: Basic Books.

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
 ie Summarize how hypertext can be designed to (re)produce either (a) hierarchical or (b)
     flattened, networked social space.
 Da Describe an automated hypertext with which you are familiar. Then, explain how the hy-
     pertext could be redesigned to informate.
 Sh: Johnson-Eilola and Selber call on professional writers “to slowly, but purposefully, recog-
     nize both contracting and expanding forms of hypertext,” and yet they warn that “given
    the traditionally low status of technical writers in industry relative to scientists and engi-
    neers,” accepting such a call is “potentially dangerous.” Analyze the organizational con-
    straints and related “dangers” that you, as a professional writer, might need to be aware
    of if you choose to accept their call.
  . Johnson-Eilola and Selber suggest that professional writers can alter social space through
    their writing: “expanding hypertext not only places more value on the roles of writer and
    reader, but also might help drive shifts in corporate structure at large.’ Summarize how
    changing writing—for instance, changing mediums from print to hypertext—might cause
    changes in social space.




 FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
 Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
 Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
 lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
 in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
 the field itself.
 1. technocratic approach
 2. negotiated approach
 3. Shannon-Weaver model
 4. asymmetrical power
 5. dominance
 6. oppression
 7. participatory democracy
 8. symbolic analyst
360   Chapter 7 ®     Professional Writers Produce Social Space


           CHHPTTOEHAOHEHHRE   ED THEESOEHOHEEAES                  CECBREHBOHHSATSEOHTHEESERHHOTERAEHEHEEOEHHEKRTOERODHHE



               TOWARD A CRITICAL RHETORIC OF RISK
              COMMUNICATION:                               PRODUCING                     CITIZENS AND
              THE ROLE OF TECHNICAL COMMUNICATORS
           CHRORFRGCAHHEHIAHTEHEHTHOYUHHSHRDES      ERE   SHOTARFESSPHROLGCHEARE
                                                                 REELS SHS SERHHRELTGTHHEHEROEHRHEDORZIEHERERE



              JEFFREY T. GRABILL
              Georgia State University

              W. MICHELE SIMMONS
              Purdue University


            n this article, we build on arguments in risk communication that the predominant
            linear risk communication models are problematic for their failure to consider audi-
          ence and additional contextual issues. The “failure” of these risk communication
          models has led, some scholars argue, to a number of ethical and communicative prob-
          lems. We seek to extend the critique, arguing that “risk” is socially constructed. The
          claim for the social construction of risk has significant implications for both risk com-
          munication and the roles of technical communicators in risk situations. We frame
          these implications as a “critical rhetoric” of risk communication that (1) dissolves the
          separation of risk assessment from risk communication to locate epistemology within
          communicative processes; (2) foregrounds power in risk communication as a way to
          frame ethical audience involvement; (3) argues for the technical communicator as
          one possessing the research and writing skills necessary for the complex processes of
          constructing and communicating risk.
               Since the 1960s there has been an increasing concern for the environment in the
          United States. A number of risk communication scholars credit the 1962 publication
          of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring with launching the contemporary environmental
          movement (Belsten; Rubin and Sachs). In Silent Spring, Carson detailed the dangers
          of pesticides that accumulate in water, soil, and food, and as a result, generated a pub-
          lic awareness of environmental hazards. This awareness was heightened in 1969
          when a series of environmental dangers plagued the nation, including the Santa
          Barbara oil spill, the seizure of eleven tons of salmon in Wisconsin and Minnesota
          due to excessive DDT concentrations, the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, and the
           smog alert days in Los Angeles when health officials suggested that children not play
           outside (Belsten 30; Rubin and Sachs 54). The year 1970 brought the first Earth Day,
           and a “call for new initiatives to resolve environmental problems” (Belsten 30). The
           public was no longer content to leave the fate of human health and the environment
           to government and scientific experts. Communities demanded an explanation of
           what risks were present, and what was going to be done about those risks. When the
           U.S. congress began passing environmental regulations that provided for public in-
           volvement, such as the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,

           Source: Technical Communication Quarterly 7.4 (Fall 1998), “Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication: Producing
           Citizens and the Role of Technical Communicators,” Jeffrey T. Grabill, and W. Michele Simmons, pp. 415-441.   Reprinted
           by permission of The Association of Teachers of Technical Writing.
                                                                                                            4
                       Grabill, Simmons   ® Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   361

and Liability Act (CERCLA) in 1980, the public legally became an important com-
ponent in the decisions of environmental management. Risk communication
evolved out of the need for risk managers to gain public acceptance for policies
grounded in risk assessment methodologies. However, conflicts began to arise be-
tween the quantitative approach to risk assessment—the characterization of the po-
tential adverse health effects based on an evaluation of results of epidemiological,
toxicological, and environmental research—and the public’s perceptions of risk
(Plough and Krimsky). As a result, experts in risk assessment and management
worked to design models for effectively and efficiently explaining risk to the public—
risk communication.
     Although Craig Waddell argues that communicating the risk of both natural haz-
ards and consumer products is “an increasingly important aspect of the work of both
technical experts and professional communicators”         (Risk Communication     1), risk
communication has been investigated primarily by communication, cognitive psy-
chology, and risk assessment scholars. Too many of these approaches to risk commu-
nication have been arhetorical—typically, decontextualizing risk and failing to con-
sider social factors that influence public perception of risk. Such a characterization of
risk communication has been used to explain why communication problems arise—
either audiences fail to understand risk and/or they reject what they are hearing (see,
for example, Belsten). In this article, we build in arguments in risk communication
that the predominant linear risk communication models are flawed for their failure to
consider audience and additional contextual issues. We argue, following scholars like
Craig Waddell and Barbara Mirel, that risk is socially constructed, and the failure to
see risk as socially constructed leads to an artificial separation of risk assessment from
risk communications. This separation can lead to unethical and oppressive risk com-
munication practices because the public is separated from fundamental risk decision
making processes. The claim for the social construction of risk has significant impli-
cations for both risk communication and the roles of technical communicators in risk
situations. We frame these implications as a “critical rhetoric” of risk communication
that (1) dissolves the separation of risk assessment from risk communication to locate
epistemology within communicative processes; (2) foregrounds power in risk commu-
nication as a way to frame ethical audience involvement; and (3) argues for the tech-
nical communicator as one possessing the research and writing skills necessary for the
complex processes of constructing and communicating risk.


INSTITUTIONS OF TRUTH: THE PRODUCTION OF RISK
Three disciplines contribute to much of the risk communication literature: risk as-
sessment, cognitive psychology, and communication. While each has made signif
cant contributions to the field of risk communication, each has to some degree con-
tributed to the positivist positioning of most risk communication studies. We argue
that it is important to examine these disciplines and related institutions in an effort
to understand how hierarchies of power are established and exercised through each.
Foucault asserts that institutions exercise power by regulating and constraining
knowledge-making, production, and consumption through a system of rules and prac-
tices. Foucault also argues that by understanding the ways in which power is exer-
362   Chapter 7    ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          cised, and looking for gaps in this system, we can work toward resisting, even altering
          these unequal power relations. An examination                of the institutions currently con-
          tributing to risk communication will reveal that each still grants asymmetrical power
          in decision making processes to experts, and that this asymmetry serves to mask the
          complex ways of knowledge about risk is socially produced. Our purpose here is to
          foreground the institutional and disciplinary production of knowledge about risk in
          order to look later for gaps or “space” within these systems for change. (The concept
          of “the institution” is important, and we explain our use of the term in more detail
          later in the article. Here we use the concept of “institution” in two senses, as a disci-
          pline [or regular, shared ways of producing and distributing knowledge] and as an or-
          ganization [or bureaucracies with policy and decision making power]. Our concern at
          this point in the article is with the interrelationships between disciplines and the or-
          ganizations that mark the institutionalization of knowledge production and policy
          making about risk.)
               The first and still prominent contributor to knowledge about risk communica-
          tion is risk assessment. Scholars of risk assessment work to identify and quantify risk
          to human health and the environment to determine the probability of accidents or
          the spread of disease. Risk assessment develops scientific methods for generating an
          assessment of risk. Regulatory agencies—in the decision making processes of risk
          management—evaluate and compare remediation options in order to select an ap-
          propriate regulatory response to a potential hazard (National Research Council).
          Risk assessment is commonly located within private and governmental institutions
          that create risks or regulate them. Because risk assessment is a function of scientific
          and technological disciplines and experts, the access of others to these institutions is
          necessarily limited. When environmental regulations such as CERCLA began man-
          dating that the public be involved in approving the risk policy, risk assessors began
          developing models of risk communication               (Hance, Chess, and Sandman; Slovic).
          While the risk assessment literature promotes public inclusion in decision making
           about handling a hazardous waste site or risk situation, it asserts that the solution lies
           in educating the public and bringing public perception into conformity with scien-
           tific rationality. For example, an early and still dominant definition of risk communi-
           cation adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) asserts that risk
           communication is “the act of conveying or transmitting information between inter-
           ested parties about levels of health or environmental risks; the significance or mean-
           ings of such risks; or decisions, actions or policies aimed at managing or controlling
           such risks” (Corvello, Sandman, and Slovic 112). Scientists and government officials
           who advocate this definition believe that making the public understand the risk will
           bring citizen approval. Risk is determined by experts and communication is the trans-
           fer of information from those who produce knowledge to those who consume it.
                When researchers in risk assessment began to realize that the public rarely per-
           ceives risk the way risk assessors do, they began working with researchers in cognitive
           psychology to explain the discrepancies between “expert” assessment and public per-
           ceptions of risk. As Barbara Mirel explains,

                  Because psychological theorists of risk see that an individual’s outrage about risk is gener-
                  ated by cognitive reactions to social and ethical interests, they argue that the goal ofrisk
                                                                                               1
                         Grabill, Simmons     * Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication      363

     communication must not be to educate citizens in expert “facts” to change their opinions
     but rather to evoke dialogue through a focus on the sources of a particular audience’s out-
     rages and fears. (45)

Together, scholars in risk assessment and cognitive psychology adapted psychometric
scales to predict how public audiences would react to specific risks. Paul Slovic ex-
plains that psychometric scales
     ask people to judge the current riskiness (or safety) of diverse sets of hazardous activities,
     substances, and technologies, and to indicate their desires for risk reduction and regula-
     tion of these hazards. These global judgments have then been related to judgments about
     the hazard’s status on various qualitative characteristics of risk. (408)

Risk communicators currently use psychometric risk factors to determine how best to
adapt their initial message to the public and how to negotiate the decision making
process (Slovic). However, these factors focus primarily on the risk itself, not the
public or on a range of other contextual issues. For example, a person might be asked
to rate the hazard of living near a chemical company that produces toxic chemicals
ona scale for nine different attributes. Attributes include how well known the hazard
is to the person, how harmful the effects of the hazard would be, how frightening
those effects are, how easily those effects can be controlled, how easily the hazard it-
self can be avoided, and so on. Risk is then characterized with reference to these at-
tributes. Health assessors consider these risk types static and universal perceptions.
As a result, they often approach risk similarly in all communities, often leading to in-
appropriate policies and hostile reactions from involved citizens (see, for example,
Ross 176).
     Slovic argues that one generalization that can be drawn from psychometric stud-
ies is that “Perceived risk is quantifiable and predictable. Psychometric techniques
seem well suited for identifying similarities and differences among groups with regard
to risk perception and attitudes” (408). We argue, however, that these generalizations
pose a problem for risk communication because these labels, which try to provide ob-
jective estimates for the public’s “irrationalities,” often take on ontological status and
do not account for differences across communities. People’s risk perceptions are de-
termined by real and localized situations, not hypothetical, decontextualized ques-
tions on psychometric scales. Barbara Mirel argues likewise:

    [S]ome researchers claim that such psychological theories are too limited for the needs of
    risk communication. They argue that by using the individual as the unit of analysis, psy-
    chological theories fail to capture critical social and cultural influences, influences that
    will not be adequately addressed by communications simply oriented to outrage factors.
    These critics see social and cultural structures and relationships as the units of analysis,
    contending that perceptions of risk are constructed and perhaps even determined by
    membership in certain social and cultural groups. (45)

Wheri some of these factors are disregarded in the decision making process, the con-
flicts that result are conflicts over the very “truth” about risk. As Mirel argues, the
“real debates’ going on in risk controversies. . . are over the institutions that different
groups set up as ‘decision processors’. . . questions about the distribution of power, the
364   Chapter 7   #® Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          credibility of authority, and the legitimacy of decision making practices and proce-
          dures” (47). Methodologies drawn from cognitive psychology, like psychometric
          scales, do include public perception in the decision making process, but they deny
          citizens any real power in determining what factors should shape the risk policy. Here
          again, the institutional location of knowledge production is important. There are
          clear lines between knowledge producers and consumers, with citizens playing only
          limited roles in the construction of risk.
               In addition to risk assessment and cognitive psychology, communication studies
          has contributed significantly to our knowledge of risk communication. Typical ap-
          proaches in communication are encouraging in that they see risk communication as a
          two-way process—asserting that all involved parties have valuable information to
          contribute in decision making processes. However, with some exceptions (Juanillo
          and Scherer; Rowan “What Risk,” “Goals,” and “The Technical”), many studies at-
          tempt to establish rules and canons for effective communication that fail to acknowl-
          edge that social factors play a significant role in the public perception of risk and
          therefore should be considered in decision making processes (Adams; Heath and
          Nathan; Castelli). Work in communication, then, makes a significant start toward re-
          locating aspects of risk assessment. However, little research has been done on these
          social factors, and therefore, little work has focused on how public perceptions and
          different interests, values, emotions, and rationalities can be incorporated into cur-
          rent institutional locations and practices of knowledge production about risk.
          Currently, risk assessment is separated from risk communication, and both stand in a
          more powerful (and removed) relation to the public. Understanding the exclusion of
          citizens from meaningful participation in the construction of risk itself is an impor-
          tant step toward understanding why many in risk communication feel it fails too of-
          ten (e.g., Belsten). These institutional sites of knowledge-making, we will argue, con-
          stitute a location for changing risk assessment and communication.



          CURRENT APPROACHES                   OF RISK ASSESSMENT
          AND COMMUNICATION
          The institutional positioning of risk assessment, management, and communication is
           important for understanding how issues like risk, theories of communication, and au-
          diences are perceived. The positions of risk assessors and communicators within in-
          dustry and government often give a “practical” edge to published discussions of past
          risk situations or new models and tactics for future success. And it is in the practice of
          risk communication that most observers see systematic problems. Laura Belsten, for
          example, writes that the practice of environmental risk communication has “failed
          miserably,” largely because agencies and firms dealing with risk decision making have
          excluded the public (31). She writes that most government agencies and private firms
          adopt some version of a “decide-announce-defend” policy in which decision making
          (risk management) happens behind closed doors with risk communicators then
          charged with defending the decisions to a sometimes hostile public. In this process,
          soliciting public comment happens only after the real decisions have been made.
          Belsten writes that the public’s only recourse is to challenge decisions made for (and
                        Grabill, Simmons     = Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication    365

to) them in court or through public pressure on politicians, resulting in costly, time-
consuming, and ineffective public policy processes (31-32).
    The ineffective practice that Belsten describes is closely connected to the models
of communication that inform practice. There are a number of models for risk assess-
ment and communication to be found, and we think these models—to the extent
that they are connected to practice—are descriptive of work in risk assessment and
communication. Our review of the literature turns up four distinct models linked to
risk communication, but here we have collapsed them into two categories. The first
category we call “technocratic” approaches, a term we take from Waddell (“Saving”)
to describe positivistic, linear (one-way) approaches to risk communication. The sec-
ond category we call “negotiated,” a term we think describes a set of approaches de-
veloped as a critique of technocratic positions. Negotiated theories tend to work on
an explicitly “democratic” model, yet as we will show, are still largely linear (and
therefore limited) in their view of communication.


Technocratic Approaches
The technocratic approach is generally understood as a one-way flow of technical in-
formation from the “experts” to the public (Fiorino; Rowan “Goals”). In the techno-
cratic approach, risk communicators to educate/influence the public to think about
risk the way experts do (Plough and Krimsky 304). Technical aspects of risk, not the
values, concerns, fears, and opinions of each local community are considered during
decision making processes. This is a vision of communication with a long history.
Before CERCLA, health assessors determined the quantitative risk of a hazard and
dictated to the government or responsible industry how to alleviate that risk. The
public, their concerns, questions, and opinions were excluded from the decision mak-
ing process. Even after CERCLA, health assessors have had a difficult time under-
standing how to involved the public in the decision making process. The difficulty
rests in the problems of accounting for a range of social, economic, cultural, political,
and psychological factors in the largely quantitative decision making models used in
tisk assessment. For example, Steven Katz and Carolyn Miller, in their examination
of a waste siting controversy in North Carolina, assert that in decision making con-
texts, “risk communication developed as an attempt to overcome these differences by
‘correcting’ the public’s ‘risk perceptions’ so that they would better match the ‘risk
analyses’ made by the experts” (116). Therefore, when there are conflicts between
the determined risk of a situation and the public’s perception(s) of that risk, the prob-
lems that result are constructed as problems of communication (e.g., lack of informa-
tion). For example, Stratman et al. cit Milton Russell, an EPA administrator for pol-
icy, planning, and evaluation as characterizing the risk communication process in
terms of a metaconduit model:
    Let’s imagine risk reduction as a consumer-driven production and distribution process.
    Scientists, who assess the severity of the risks, are the manufacturers. Government regula-
    tors, who make risk management decisions, are the wholesalers. And professional com-
    municators—network and newspaper journalists—are the retailers. We government regu-
    latory wholesalers use risk characterizations from the scientists to explain the reasons for
    our decision. Then journalistic retailers pick up our product on the loading dock. . . [and]
366   Chapter 7 =   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



              they present the news of the day. Based on those presentations, consumers of the news de-
              cide to buy the news or not, use it or misuse it, and change their behavior or demand that
              public officials change theirs. ... If citizens misjudge risk, their orders will still come
              through, and the government machine still delivers, but the results don’t necessarily leave
              citizens better off. (qtd. In Stratman et al. 10)

          The model of communication here is strikingly similar to Shannon and Weaver's
          model. Knowledge is constructed prior to communication, and miscommunication is
          attributed to “noise” (or irrationality) along a one-way, linear channel. The “techno-
          cratic” approach of communication, then, sees risk as determined by experts prior to
          communication. “Effective” risk communication is the result either of transferring in-
          formation to a public that understands and accepts it, or in some formulations, per-
          suading the public to accept a given risk (see Sandman). In either case, knowledge is
          “scientifically” produced prior to communication, communication itself is largely lin-
          ear, and audiences are seen as needing education and/or persuasion—management—
          and not as participants in the rhetorical construction of risk (see Porter, Audience,
          Chapter 3, for a discussion of audience management).

          Negotiated Approaches

          What we call “negotiated” approaches are actually a set of models that were devel-
          oped as a critique and alternative to technocratic risk communication. They begin by
          questioning the technocratic assumption that risk assessment can be determined
          based solely on a defined set of principles and scientific norms independent of cul-
          tural values. Alonzo Plough and Sheldon Krimsky characterize the technocratic ap-
          proach as one where “perceived responses to risk are important only in understanding
          the extent to which ordinary people’s ideas deviate from the truth. .. from the per-
          spective of technical rationality, risk can be studied independently of context” (305).
          Thus, scholars like Plough and Krimsky seek to solve communication problems
          through a more negotiated, two-way approach to risk.
               Belsten’s solution for poor risk communication is to offer a theory of “community
          collaboration,” and we think her work is representative of useful negotiated ap-
          proaches. Belsten’s work rests on theories of public collaboration in public policy de-
          cision making (36). She argues, quoting others, that “collaboration occurs when a
          group of autonomous stakeholders of a problem domain [are] engaged in an interac-
          tive process, using shared rules, norms, and structures, to act or decide on issues re-
          lated to that domain” (37). Any one who is affected by a given risk is considered a
          stakeholder, and community collaboration only works when a high degree of partici-
          pation is included in public decision making about risk. In addition, stakeholders are
          included early in the process and have the option to say “no”—the acceptance of a
          given risk is voluntary (37-39). Negotiated approaches are important for their recog-
          nition of audience/the public as important participants in decision making processes.
          Furthermore, such approaches are useful in their recognition that participation must
          be wide-spread and take place early in decision making processes. Some scholars
           (e.g., Rowan “The Technical”; Ross) ground their work in a powerful theory of com-
          municative ethics, usually Habermas. At its best, work relying on Habermas argues
          that decisions made currently within technical realms (e.g., administrative bureau-
                      Grabill, Simmons   ®   Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   367

cracies) should be deliberated publicly (see Blyler). The turn to Habermas makes
sense; it is an attempt to argue questions of civic concern within a framework of dis-
course ethics that seeks to prevent coercion. But we see limitations with Habermas,
and by extension, with solutions of many negotiated approaches. Habermas argues
that only when a decision emerges from an argumentative discourse situation that is
in accordance with the pragmatic rules of discourse is the result (“norm”) justified
(71). His rule-bound procedure (“practical discourse”) “insures that all concerned in
principle take part, freely and equally, in a cooperative search for the truth” (198).
But Habermas’s system of argumentation is idealized; participants in a “real” risk situ-
ation are not free and equal, and despite the Habermasian rules for what “should”
structure ethical communication, risk situations rarely, if ever, approximate his ideal.
In short, negotiated approaches are problematic for their failure to include a notion
of power, and therefore, we are suspicious that they are capable of changing risk com-
munication practice. As we argue for risk as socially constructed, we are looking to-
ward an approach to participatory decision making that links a theory of power (and
powerlessness) to the exercises of power involved in knowledge production (risk as-
sessment/communication).



RISK AS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
Our claim is that the risk of a given situation is socially constructed by a number of
interests and factors. Indeed, when there are disputes and communication “problems”
in a risk situation, we suggest that what is happening is not problematic or an imped-
iment to be overcome. Rather, these problems are a public contestation over the
meaning of risk—the “truth” about risk is actually a product of such disputes. Our
concern with the social construction of risk, however, extends beyond epistemology.
As disputes about risk are characterized by interactions between interests more and
less powerful, the failure to account for power in decision making about the meaning
of risk—a failure of both technocratic and negotiated approaches—can lead to the
“oppression” of (typically citizen) audiences. Conceptualizing risk as socially con-
structed is important because (1) it locates knowledge-making within communica-
tion processes, and (2) it considers how power is differentially exercised in such
processes.
     As we have suggested, one of the problems associated with linear approaches to
risk communication is the artificial separation of risk assessment from risk communi-
cation. This separation prevents a view of risk as socially constructed because knowl-
edge production is not a function of communication processes. Rather than fostering
an exchange and collaborative generation of knowledge that contributes to public
policy, the technocratic approach, for example, sees the audience as consumers of in-
formation to be considered after decisions have been made. This audience-as-con-
sumer stance is reflected in current CERCLA regulations on public participation and
in Belsten’s descriptions of typical practices, where public approval must be gained,
but only after policy decisions have been made. The CERCLA section on public par-
ticipation states that “before adoption of any plan for remedial action to be under-
taken” the appropriate party must take both of the following actions: “(1) Publish a
368   Chapter 7 #   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          notice and brief analysis of the proposed plan and make such plan available to the
          public. (2) Provide a reasonable opportunity for submission of written and oral com-
          ments and an opportunity for a public meeting at or near the facility at issue regard-
          ing the proposed plan and regarding any proposed findings” (42 U.S.C. section 9617
          CERCLA section 117). Further, a transcript of the meeting must be kept and made
          available to the public. While CERCLA section 117 (a) states that the analysis of the
          proposed plan must include “sufficient information as may be necessary to provide a
          reasonable explanation of the proposed plan and alternative proposals considered,”
          public opinion does not have to be solicited or incorporated into the initial decision
          making process (42 U.S.C. section 9617 CERCLA section 117). This separation of
          assessment and communication denies the public the ability to actively participate in
          the production of public policy, too often resulting in public objections to policy and
          resistance to implementation (see Katz and Miller; Rowan, “What Risk”; and espe-
          cially Stratman et al.).
               The positivist view that science discovers an objective Truth through a rational,
          linear process has been called into question by many (e.g., Kuhn; Latour) who argue
          that knowledge is not an accumulation of facts that progress toward the Truth but is
          rather a collection of perceptions that are agreed upon by a discourse community.
          Rules for how science is conducted or how theory choices are made are negotiated by
          the practitioners of a community who hold to a shared set of methods and beliefs.
          The progression toward increased public involvement in the decision making about
          risk is contingent upon the concept of scientific knowledge shifting toward a negoti-
          ated understanding, a shift contingent upon creating a space within “the community”
          of risk assessors for “others.” As a result, what some see as the problems of public out-
          cry against risk assessments or policies can also be seen as the construction of “risk”
          itself. In this manner, risk communication becomes a complex web of issues and par-
          ticipants that work together to construct a risk policy. Similarly, Craig Waddell ar-
          gues that
               risk communication is not a process whereby values, beliefs, and emotions are communi-
               cated only from the public and technical information is communicated only from techni-
               cal experts. Instead, it is an interactive exchange of information during which all partici-
               pants also communicate, appeal to, and engage values, beliefs, and emotions. Through
               this process, public policy decision are socially constructed. (“Saving” 142)
          Rather than a linear flow of technical information from the risk assessors to the pub-
           lic, risk communication becomes a web, a network, an interactive process of ex-
           changing information, opinions, and values among all involved parties. In contrast to
           all linear models, this approach flattens the hierarchy between the “expert” and
           “non-expert” and believes risk assessment must incorporate technical information
           about a risk within a broader framework, including social, political, and economic
           factors. Recently, similar socially constructed views of risk communication have been
           promoted by scholars such as Rowan (“Goals”); Juanillo and Scherer; and Plough and
           Krimsky. Additionally, Katz and Miller see this approach to risk communication as
           fostering participatory democracy, emphasizing “process more than results, with par-
           ticipating citizens gaining not only results but satisfaction and investment from their
           engagement in decision making” (133-34).
                        Grabill, Simmons    #® Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   369


                        Risk Assessment          Risk Communication
                                                               _—__—_____»




                        Agents: experts          Agents: experts; special
                        Agency: “method”;         interests; “public”
                        “Science”                Agency: distribution of
                        Goal: “Truth”             information
                        about risk               Goal: informed consent;
                                                 persuasion; “rational”
                                                 decision-making
                 Figure 1. Traditional risk assessment and communication.


     If, as we have argued, risk is socially constructed, then the separation between
expert/public and assessment/communication cannot hold. We have constructed the
separation of assessment and communication as a linear process of research and dis-
semination (see Figure 1).
     According to this representation, the processes of risk assessment and communi-
cation are linear and sequential, and the risk assessors are typically “experts”: scien-
tists, statisticians, actuaries, economists, public health officials. Our characterization
 is not meant to dismiss or demean the expertise, insight, and inquires of intellectuals
 involved in risk assessment. Their work and expertise is crucial to the process. We are
 not arguing that risk assessment be thrown out, but rather than additional knowledge
 be added to the mix. Because, as we will argue, citizens are capable of contributing
 valuable knowledge to the decision making process, we do want to call into question
 the exclusive domain accorded risk assessors and the power of the expertise granted
 them. (As Winner argues, as groups contest public decision making about technolo-
gies, each often produces a set of experts who can differ widely on a given “scientific”
question. Such a situation results in “[1] futile rituals of expert advice and [2] inter-
minable disagreements about which choices are morally justified” [75]. The result is
continual use of conflicting “expert” advice, tangled ethical and moral discussions
about the design and use of technologies, and a range of intractable problems.
Winner concludes that “political disputes about technology are seldom if ever settled
by calling upon the advice of experts” [76]. In this way, Winner dispenses with expert
opinion, at least in terms of the status typically given to experts.) Such a situation al-
lows an arbitrary line to be drawn between assessment and communication activities,
and such a line serves as a false border with epistemology linked to science on one
side, leaving an impoverished rhetoric of “arrangement” and “style” on the other.
The effect of this separation between assessment and communication is to frame
communication in ways we have discussed earlier: risk communicators are given the
task of disseminating information (the truth about risk) to various public audiences.
The resulting rhetoric of risk communication—stripped of its epistemological possi-
bilities—has at its goal the creation of consent, either via belief in the truth of the in-
formation or a range of persuasive strategies (see Katz and Miller). The problems risk
communicators face often stem from the fact that the public resists their separation
370   Chapter 7   8   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          from the processes, and their resistance takes the only form available—rejection of
          risk communication and communicators (see Rowan, “What Risk,” for examples of
          such rejection). (Stephen Doheny-Farina sees a similar problem in the area of tech-
          nology transfer. He focuses on the notion of “uncertainty” in the largely linear com-
          munication models involved in technology transfer [uncertainty=difference between
          information needed and information available]. He writes that the theory of commu-
          nication that underlies most practice separates knowledge [and knowledge produc-
          tion] from communication and sees knowledge as produced by experts in a realm sep-
          arate from audiences and non-experts. In this way, knowledge becomes a commodity
          [8-9]. When communication is successful, there is little uncertainty and the “truth”
          is well-received. When there are problems, “the concept of uncertainty indicates that
          the communication problem is not one of meaning but one of the availability of the
          correct information” [9]. Doheny-Farina’s description of the status of knowledge and
          models of communication in technology transfer describes how communication
          “problems” are constructed in technocratic approaches to risk assessment and com-
          munication.) Seeing risk as socially constructed situates knowledge making and audi-
          ences within communication processes.
               The notion of risk as socially constructed also asks us to foreground power. While
          often alluded to in risk communication scholarship, “power” strikes us as the most
          undertheorized issue in the risk communication literature. In our view, technocratic
          approaches of risk communication can easily (and perhaps necessarily) oppress audi-
          ences. And even “negotiated” approaches are problematic because they tend to as-
          sume equal power relations within processes of negotiation. We take our notion of
          power and oppression from Iris Marion Young because it is directly connected to our
          central concern with participation in decision making. Domination and oppression
          are key terms in Young’s work because they allow her to name certain practices “un-
          just” outside a distributive framework. For Young, domination occurs when people are
          systematically excluded from “participating in determining t heir actions or the con-
          ditions of their actions” (31). In many ways, most people are dominated in some as-
          pect of their lives, usually at work or school—institutional systems that often do not
          allow people fundamental access to decision making. Young argues that the powerful
          draw on the resources of an institution through the everyday practices of the institu-
          tion, thereby maintaining and extending their power. This is precisely what happens
          when experts, committees, or closed agencies control the decision making processes
           involved     with   risk assessment/communication      (see Katz   and   Miller;   Waddell
          “Saving” and “Defining”). To act powerfully within an institution, then, requires
          access to everyday processes and practices. James Porter writers that access can mean
           three things, infrastructural access (access to resources), literacy (education), and
           community acceptance (RHETORICAL ETHICS). In the sense in which access is
           important for decision making about risk, infrastructural access means access to the
           processes of decision making within an institution, literacy means the discursive
           means to participate effectively, and acceptance refers to a “listening stance,” or a
           commitment to collaborative decision making. Access means not only “a place at the
           table,” it means the rhetorical ability to participate effectively and the structured re-
           quirement that others listen.
              For Young, oppression is a qualitatively different experience than domination.
           An oppressed group need not have an oppressing group; oppression is structural and
                         Grabill, Simmons     * Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication      371

relational as well as material and often the result of “humane” practices and inten-
tions. In Young’s schema, oppression has “five faces,” yet we believe one is particu-
larly relevant to risk communications—powerlessness. According to Young, power-
lessness is an oppression that is the result of a lack of participation and a reliance on
hierarchy. Many people have some power in relation to others. Young argues, how-
ever, that

     The powerless are those. . . over whom power is exercised without their exercising it; the
     powerless are situated so that they must take orders and rarely have the right to give them.
     . . [a] social position that allows persons little opportunity to develop and exercise skills.
     The powerless have little or no work autonomy, exercise little creativity or judgment in
     their work, have no technical expertise or authority, express themselves awkwardly, espe-
     cially in public or bureaucratic settings, and do not command respect. (56-57)

The powerless, in other words, lack all three forms of access and therefore have little
chance to change their position.
    We believe that in order to be ethical and nonoppressive, decision making
processes in risk assessment/communication must consider not only the scientific as-
sessment of the risk posed, but also the values, emotions, and concerns of all involved
parties, with preference given to the input of the less powerful (e.g., citizens, particu-
larly those typically underrepresented). This interactive exchange of information
among parties is a complex process that a linear model of risk assessment and then
communication cannot accommodate. Rather, we envision risk communication as an
intricate web of issues and participants that socially constructs policy. What we envi-
sion, namely, is a critical rhetoric of risk communication that sees risk as constructed
socially and the processes of construction as the focus of concern.


RESEARCH AND THE TECHNICAL COMMUNICATOR:
TOWARD A CRITICAL RHETORIC FOR RISK
COMMUNICATION
A critical rhetoric for risk communication would be based on the following princi-
ples. First, it sees risk as socially constructed and rhetorical—an epistemic rhetoric
that focuses on the construction and communication of risk. The meaning and value
of risk in a given situation is a function of multiple and sometimes competing dis-
courses. In this way, controversy about risk is reframed not as a problem or a negotia-
tion between two parties (the risk maker and the audience) but as a complex web of
stakeholders and positions that contribute to the meaning of risk in a given situation.
Second, a critical rhetoric focuses on the processes of decision making, seeing these
processes as the key institutional locations for knowledge making (e-g., within gov-
ernment agencies or legislation). In particular, a critical rhetoric focuses on the rela-
tions of power within decision making processes, asking questions about who partici-
pates and in whose interests decisions are made. And third, a critical rhetoric seeks to
contextualize and localize risk situations and processes, a function both of its rhetori-
cal approach and its concern with local participation. By contextualizing risk, a criti-
cal rhetoric counters the tendency to develop “scientific” and universal models of as-
sessment and communication that treat risk algorithmically and audiences as
372   Chapter 7 ®   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          universal, rational, and therefore silent. Viewing “the public” as universal and reason-
          able, traditional risk communication theory privileges logos and assumes all audi-
          ences think alike—that all rational individuals will be swayed by the same evidence.
          (We have a problem with the concept of “the public,” and it is a problem we fail to
          solve here. In fact, quite the opposite is true. We have recourse to a [false] concept of
          “the public” as a rhetorical counter to “experts,” but we believe the concept of “the
          public” to be largely fictional. The subject position of “the public” as coherent, uni-
          fied, and identifiable strikes us as an unhelpful decontextualization of the people af-
          fected by a given risk and therefore important participants in the construction of that
          risk. Our hope is that the critical rhetoric we outline here necessarily asks risk asses-
          sors and communicators to help identify various “publics” and to take seriously the
          differences of a given town, neighborhood, or community.) In addition, by contextu-
          alizing risk, assessors and communicators must consider a range of issues related to the
          relationship of individuals to the social institutions involved in a given risk situation.
          Such a consideration would necessarily examine concepts of race, class, gender, and
          other issues important to a given community in the assessment and communication
          of risk, issues too little considered in the risk communication literature but which are
          nonetheless deeply relevant. An investigation of these factors hopefully would work
          to inform a more ethical approach to risk communication, uncover the suppressed
          voices in risk communication approaches, and be a starting point for improving the
          present condition of how certain groups are excluded from the decision making
          process in risk communication.
               In effect, by changing the process we are looking toward more “democratic” and
          effective assessment and communication. However, we must be cautious in our use of
          the term democratic. In one sense, the technocratic approach is democratic because
          the public is involved in the last stage of the communication process—this is the par-
          ticipation of liberal democracy and interest-group politics (see Patterson and Lee).
          We are arguing for an approach that fosters participatory democracy; one that involves
          the public in fundamental ways at the earliest stages of the decision making process.
          Rather than telling the public about a risk or a decision, we are arguing for an ap-
          proach that allows the public to actively participate in producing the policy itself. An
          approach that fostered participatory democracy would grant the public—and their
          contributions to the policy—equal and sometimes preferential status with the techni-
          cal experts and their contributions. If we accept that citizens should be able to partic-
           ipate in decisions that affect themselves and their communities, and that they, them-
          selves, are the best judge of their own interests, then we see that the technocratic
          approach is incompatible with participatory democracy. And because negotiated ap-
          proaches often fail to account for asymmetries of power and conceptualize a limited
           number of stakeholders, we also see them as useful but limited. A critical approach, in
          short, seeks to solve problems of omission (e.g., people, positions, ways of knowing
          and talking), domination (e.g., failure to acknowledge differences in power), and in-
          deed oppression. We think a critical approach will lead to better risk communication.

          Research and the Technical Communicator

           In their critique of the “environmental rhetoric of ‘balance,” Robert Patterson and
           Ronald Lee argue that the appeal to “balance” in the regulatory and political dis-
                       Grabill, Simmons   # Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   373


course connected to the Kinglsey Dam relincensure “procedurally diminish[es] the
public” (26). Patterson and Lee write that the processes of decision making in reli-
censure procedures are concerned with identifying interests and then gathering infor-
mation from these interests. The problem is that “the public” does not participate in
these decision making processes but rather is represented and seen as “consubstan-
tial” with the organized interest groups capable of generating the expertise and access
necessary to participate in decision making (28-29). In this respect, Patterson and
Lee argue that “the subjective experience and moral reflection of ordinary citizens are
discounted” (29).
     We agree with their reading of this decision making process but feel that their
characterization exposes an even deeper problem of representation and participation.
The process they describe is democratic—citizens, through organized representation,
can and do participate in public policy decision making. However, the very notion of
“the public” is a representation. For us, the problem, then, is not representation, but
what kind of representation and how that representation takes place. It is possible, in
other words, to construct risk communication practices that allow citizens (various
publics) to represent themselves in decision making processes and thus add more of a
participatory element to our current (and limited) representative participation in de-
cision making about risk? We think it is possible and look to the skills of the techni-
cal communicator to help articulate such a view.
     As a way to conceptualize how a critical rhetoric of risk communication can be
implemented, we want to reconceptualize risk communication as a type of technical
communication. But beyond this, we are interested in a more research-driven, analyt-
ical role for the technical communicator, one that we hope can help break down the
line between risk assessment and communication.
     There seems little question that technical communication has been changing
due to changes in communications technologies and the political economy. Dan
Jones writes that new technologies are challenging the professional identify of tech-
nical communication, but he also asserts that changes driven by these new tech-
nologies do not take technical communication away from a central purpose and ex-
pertise as advocates for users. To this discourse of professional change, Johndan
Johnson-Eilola adds more fundamental changes in the political economy that have
altered the value and nature of production from industrial production to informa-
tion exchange. Johnson-Eilola argues for the necessity of relocating the value of
technical communication by reframing it as “symbolic-analytic” work that “medi-
ates between the functional necessities of usability and efficiency while not losing
sight of the larger rhetorical and social contexts in which users work and live” (246).
Johnson-Eilola’s contextualization of technical communication is an important
move because it forces technical communicators to wrestle with tough intellectual,
ethical, and political issues.
     We are interested in his adaptation of Reich’s symbolic-analytic worker because
such a framework describes, we believe, the complexities involved in risk communi-
cation—a type of symbolic-analytic work—and therefore articulates a connection be-
tween the research burdens of risk communication and the technical communicator.
In Johnson-Eilola’s adaptation of the symbolic-analytic worker as technical commu-
nicator, he lays out a set of characteristics that we believe are important for seeing the
technical communicator as a key player in risk assessment/communication situations.
374   Chapter 7 ® Professional Writers Produce Social Space

                                                                      r


          Johnson-Eilola writes that the technical communicator as symbolic-analytic works
          with information and produces a wide range of documents in a variety of media—typ-
           ical for most professional communicators. The symbolic-analyst, however, is also ca-
          pable of “experimentation,” “collaboration,” “abstraction,” and “systems thinking.”
          In other words, the technical communicator as symbolic analyst can conduct re-
          search, work with others from multiple specialties, “discern patterns, relationships,
          and hierarchies in large masses of information” (Johnson-Eilola 260), and think sys-
          tematically in ways that construct relationships between disciplines and within messy
          situations. Furthermore, the technical communicator as symbolic analyst retains an
          advocacy role. While many professionals function as hired advocates, we want to re-
          tain the historical advocacy for “users” that is common to the ethos of technical com-
          municators and expand that notion of advocacy to include those who normally do
          not hire professionals (e.g., citizens or “the powerless”). The connection of some of
          the symbolic-analyst’s characteristics to risk communication is obvious. But we are
          particularly interested in crossing the gap between assessment and communication,
          and we think the research capabilities of the symbolic-analyst allows the technical
          communicator to cross that gap, an issue that warrants further discussion.



           Usability Research: Participation and Epistemology
           While risk assessment may traditionally be done by biological and chemical scien-
           tists, actuaries, statisticians, and psychologists, the technical communicator as sym-
           bolic analyst can add research practices other specialists cannot provide. In particu-
           lar, it is the technical communicator   who can insert the audience/public/citizens
           directly into the risk assessment process through usability testing. We are not talking
           about usability strictly in terms of document production (although we are not exclud-
           ing this). Rather, we are looking toward a wider range of research practices—a range
           of contextual interviewing and observation practices in particular—that necessitates
           researchers work with audiences in the construction of knowledge (e.g., risk). For ex-
           ample, Katherine Rowan (“Goals”) asserts that in order to create awareness and con-
           cern about risk, messages from all parties must be detectable, decodable, and consid-
           erate to all. Usability testing could examine such messages as well as their delivery
           mechanism in order to facilitate a more effective negotiation and decision making
           process among involved parties.
                Usability is powerful because we believe that “users”—citizens, the public, stake-
           holders—have important knowledge often excluded from decision making, and it is
           this “user knowledge” that usability testing can get to. The analogy we are making
           here is that the user of technologies and documents found in most usability work is
           like the “user” of technologies and documents in risk situations. In this case, members
           of a given community are “users” of the public spaces and environmental resources as
           well as the risk communication distributed to them. But more importantly in our
           view, users in all contexts are potential participants in decision making about tech-
           nologies—from computer interfaces and documentation to waste incinerators and
           construction projects. We feel they should be actual participants, and in this regard,
           we want to use Bob Johnson’s work to develop a notion of user knowledge for that
           participation.
                         Grabill, Simmons    =® Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication    375

     Johnson writes that most user are perceived as “dumb,” at the “bottom of the
proverbial epistemological ladder,” and therefore designers of technologies seek to
“idiot-proof’ technologies to keep users out of harm’s way. In contrast to this,
Johnson believes that users,are productive and therefore “have a responsibility for the
design and implementation of technology” (57). He continues,

     The reason for the absence of discussions of users and use runs deep in the history of west-
     ern culture, and at the root is the question of ownership of knowledge—in short, the
     question of epistemology. Who creates knowledge? Is it created only by those who we
     generally equate with knowledge, like philosophers or scientists? Or is knowledge produc-
     tion also within the province of those generally associated with “the practical,” such as
     technicians or users of technology? (58)

The answer is that users are productive, and Johnson glosses three types of user
knowledge. (The connection between Johnson’s notion of users and use producing
knowledge is clearly, connected to Scandinavian design of technologies. Designers
like Pelle Ehn have long argued for work-oriented participatory design, and as a part
of that work, have often articulated a notion of epistemology linked to users and use.)
Users as “practitioners” are capable of “cunning intelligence” (metis), or the ability to
use technologies in new, effective, and context-dependent ways not envisioned by
front-end designers. Users as “producers” are more clearly connected by Johnson to
the design of technologies, but most importantly for our purposes here, the notion of
users as “citizens” focuses on how users can become “responsible members of the tech-
nological community” (77). Johnson writes that the “spaces in which the knowledge
of users and the cultural environment intersect are difficult to describe. . . because
there is no terminology for discussing users in large, social contexts” (77). We feel
that risk situations provide the terminology that Johnson is missing, and furthermore,
we feel that a recognition of user knowledge is essential for changing the epistemo-
logical order in risk situations.
      For instance, Johnson cites an important example in which users helped design
traffic flow in Seattle. The situation was one common to many large cities—too many
cars on the road during peak commuting hours. Taking a common approach, trans-
portation officials measured traffic flows utilizing various counting and statistical
methodologies in order to determine how to reroute traffic and which roads to ex-
pand. However nothing seemed to work until a team of technical communicators
from the University of Washington explored the same problem from a different angel.
Rather than studying the traffic, this team studied the driving preferences and habits
of Seattle citizens through surveys, interviews, focus groups, and observations (81).
This information provided a workable solution to the traffic problems. The technical
communicators sought user knowledge about the problem, and in fact, users had the
best solutions to this particular traffic problem and were able to solve problems that
“experts” could not. About this example, Johnson writes “In terms of the user as citi-
zen... the point is made most strongly: the users are represented as an important
force in the design of the system. . . because they are asked to help determine the best
solutions to the problem” (82). Citizens possess knowledge about how a technology is
used in, or would affect, a particular community. This understanding is something
“experts” may lack but need in order to design a usable technology. As a result, citi-
zens can contribute valuable information to the design and decision making process.
376   Chapter 7   =   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          Our point is that users are intelligent and productive—like experts, users create
          knowledge—and sometimes user productivity takes decision making in new and im-
          portant directions. But our point is also that users cannot be productive if they are
          silent. The power of Johnson’s example comes from the fact that it was technical
          communicators who thought to ask users about the problems of traffic flow and im-
          plemented the research practices necessary to help construct user knowledge.
                In fact, technical communicators are perhaps uniquely capable of participating in
          the construction of user knowledge. But what types of research practices are we talk-
          ing about? We are not talking about testing methods commonly located in usability
          labs, for they are most appropriate for working with discrete technologies. Like the
          researchers in Seattle, we are talking about methods common to some usability work
          and most qualitative research: surveys, interviews, and perhaps most importantly,
          field-based observation of how people use the spaces and/or technologies associated
          with a given risk. The type of research and multidisciplinary work we are framing
          here expands the scope of work for technical communicators. We believe that the
          technical communicator may be one of the few professional workers trained for both
          the multidisciplinary perspectives and user advocacy necessary to help dissolve the
          boundary between assessment and communication and thereby facilitate a more par-
          ticipatory construction of risk. In fact, as Figure 2 helps us illustrate, we believe the
          technical communicator as symbolic analyst allows us to move between two key bi-
          naries in risk communication scholarship, expert/non-expert and assessment/commu-
          nication. In this figure, we see the binaries of continua in an attempt to express a
          range of practices between “straight” assessment and communication and the posi-
           tions between expert and non-expert. In keeping with our argument, we see the tech-
           nical communicator as able to occupy multiple positions and play a variety of roles.
               On this map, the top left quadrant represents “traditional risk assessment,” or risk
           assessment done solely by experts. The technical communicator’s role here is fairly
           traditional—to help “translate” knowledge to audiences. The top right represents
           non-expert risk assessment, or a range of informal assessment practices that people
           use whenever confronted with risk—conversation, reading, formal and informal writ-
           ing, and meetings. The technical communicator, given that he or she is capable of
           collaborative research (as a symbolic-analyst), can gain access to these processes and
           help give voice to these audiences. The bottom left represents technocratic (at the
           extreme) and other linear approaches to risk communication. The bottom right rep-
           resents a wide range of “non-expert” risk communication, or discourse produced by
           interests without the institutional designation as authorities. Of course, as we used
           Langdon Winner to suggest earlier, real life risk situations often have expertise on
           both sides of a given issue, and so our map fails to capture the complexity of audi-
           ences in such situations. Nevertheless, the technical communicator can move be-
           tween ranges and varieties of experts and non-experts. In short, this figure illustrates
           the positions we assert the technical communicator can occupy as well as the move-
           ment we believe is necessary between positions—in fact, we believe that a critical
           thetoric moves, that research and rhetorical actions must move between and across
           positions as situations and problems dictate. (We are taking our mapping practices
           and our sense of critical research practices from the work of Sullivan and Porter. See
           their book for a discussion of postmodern mapping and a significantly more substan-
                         Grabill, Simmons        = Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   377


                                            Risk Assessment



            Traditional risk assessment                        “usability”
                                                               research
                                                               with
                                                               audiences




                      Technical                                   Technical
                      communicator                                communicator




            Expert                                                                   Non-
                                                                                     Expert




                                             Technica!
                                             communicator




             Technocratic models                                       Some public interest
             of risk communication                                     groups; protest;
                                                                       citizen action

                                          Risk Communication

         Figure 7.2. The multiple positions of the technical communicator.



tial discussion of critical research.) In so doing, we believe this figure captures the
complexity of risk processes and is descriptive of the complex web that characterizes
the social construction of risk. All of these practices, from expert to non-expert as-
sessment to a wide range of communication practices happen, sometimes simultane-
ously, in a given risk situation. As Johnson-Eilola writes, “[b]ecause of the political,
economic, and social aspects of all technologies, technical communication should
not limit itself to simple functionalism, but must also include broader and more com-
plex concerns” (259). Risk assessment/communication encompasses such broad and
378   Chapter 7   =   Professional Writers Produce Social Space



          complex social, intellectual, and rhetorical concerns. Risk communication explicitly
          takes technical communication into the realm of civic discourse.

          Usability Research: Participation and Power
          The focus on research and user knowledge that we have been articulating as part of a
          critical rhetoric for risk communication has ethical as well as epistemological dimen-
          sions. Thus the issue with which we want to conclude is the same issue at the core of
          a critical rhetoric-power. If power and the abilities of professionals like technical
          communicators are located within institutions creating risks and used to manage not
          only risks but also stakeholders, then technical/risk communication and communica-
          tors are involved in a relation of power that can dominate and oppress. This is why
          we are interested in a critical rhetoric for risk/technical communication that can help
          prevent such exercises of power. (In our concern, we echo the work of others con-
          cerned with the uses to which “good” technical communication can be put and the
          potentially limiting institutions within which technical communicators work. See
          Katz; Savage; Sullivan; and Slack, Miller, and Doak.) We have argued that technical
          communicators as user advocates can bring about more participatory and ethical de-
          cision making processes. However, the implications of such a positioning create their
          own problems. We typically imagine clients for risk assessment/communication to be
          business, industry, and the government-risk makers. In our approach to risk commu-
          nication, however, we suggest that “clients” can be citizens, the public, the poor, or
          the powerless. However, it is more likely that the technical communicator will be
          hired by the relatively more powerful rather than the powerless. Because technical
          communicators have an obligation to their client, whoever hires the technical com-
          municator often has an advantage. As a result, it is possible for the technical commu-
          nicator to be caught in the very power relations that we argue technical communica-
          tors can work to dismantle. This problem of clients and advocacy is why we believe
          the merger of risk assessment and communication practice is important. Such a
          merger-hopefully-inserts audiences and audience advocacy earlier in the decision
          making process, even when technical communicators are working for more powerful
          clients. Still, problems, of advocacy will not disappear.
               Yet we believe that it is possible to change the processes of risk assessment/com-
           munication through research and writing practices in order to insert user knowledge
           and participation into decision making processes. To do so requires changing the in-
           stitutions that make decisions about risk, and this is difficult. A common view of in-
           stitutions monolithic and static bureaucracies makes institutional change an impossi-
           bility-how can we change government? business? However, Porter et al. have a view
           of institutions that sees then as rhetorical systems of decision making formed by the
           discourses that make them possible (e.g., legislation, business plans, policies, proce-
           dures, research protocols.) According to this view, institutions are “inherently dy-
           namic and open to change through the very rhetorical practices by which they oper-
           ate” (16). In short, institutions are written, and therefore, can be rewritten. In order
           to rewrite institutions, rhetorical (and sometimes material) space must be created
           within an institution; the creation of such space can sometimes have radical conse-
           quences. Our claim that users produce knowledge and that technical communicators
           are uniquely capable of the research necessary to enable users to participate in deci-
                       Grabill, Simmons   *   Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   379


sion making is an attempt to frame how institutional space can be created. The insti-
tutional separation between assessment and communication is not only false (episte-
mologically) and unproductive, but it prevents the creation of “spaces” for users
within decision making processes. We suggest that it is through research practices
that institutional space for users/citizens within knowledge producing and decision
making institutions can be constructed. It is one thing to talk about how decision
makers should listen and should allow citizens to participate (they should!). It is an en-
tirely different project to structure as part of the everyday practices of a given institu-
tion research designed to facilitate user/citizen participation as legitimate knowledge
producers and decision makers.
     How would the creation of institutional space for users/citizens solve problems or
power and powerlessness? It wouldn’t. At least not entirely. But we do think a critical
thetoric for risk communication would address problems of powerlessness because it
enables users/citizens to speak, to develop autonomy within institutions-in short, to
exercise power. The technical communicator as symbolic analyst can contribute to
critical risk communication through research and communicative practices that can
help provide a preferable space for those least powerful within assessment and com-
municative decision making practices. Such processes might indeed lead to a collec-
tive articulation of the good of a risk situation and subsequent implementation of
that good. Not only might these processes lead to more ethical risk assessment/com-
munication (the articulation of a good for a we), but we think such process would be
better because they seek to avoid the problems of mistrust and conflict that mark tra-
ditional practices. Furthermore, given the inclusion of user/citizen knowledge, such
processes might also be more “intelligent” by including multiple perspectives, differ-
ent types of knowledge, and potentially a greater number of acceptable solutions. The
risk communication literature is full of stories of corporate or governmental abuse,
citizen resistance, and general “failure.” We suggest that a critical rhetoric of risk
communications and the role of the technical communicator within that rhetoric
can help alleviate conflict and impasse through the facilitation of more effective as-
sessment/communication processes. Our title refers to “producing citizens,” and that
phrase embodies a double meaning. Risk communication practices invariably pro-
duce citizens—the real or idealized audience who consumes communication. A much
more “productive” view sees citizens as themselves producers-of knowledge, of values,
of communities. A critical rhetoric locates its energy and hope in this sense of pro-
ducing citizens by seeking to access user/citizen knowledge by creating the institu-
tional space within which risk can be collectively constructed and more effectively
communicated.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Patricia Sullivan for her encouragement and guidance.

Works Cited
    42 United States Code, Section 9617 (1995).
    Adams, William C. “The Role of Media Relations in Risk Communication.” Public
       Relations Quarterly 37.4 (1997): 28-31.
380   Chapter 7 ®    Professional Writers Produce Social Space



              Belsten,    Laura.   “Environmental     Risk  Communication     and  Community
                 Collaboration.” Earthtalk. Ed. Star Muir and Thomas Veenendall. Westport, CT:
                 Praeger, 1996. 27-42.
              Blyler, Nancy Roundy. “Habermas, Empowerment, and                      Professional     Discourse.”
                  Technical Communication Quarterly 3 (1994): 125-45.
              Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
              Castelli, J. “Welcome to the World of Risk Communication.” Safety and Health 142
                  (1990): 68-71.
              Corvello,       Vincent,   Peter Sandman,      and    Paul Slovic.   Risk Communication,       Risk
                 Statistics, and Risk Comparison: A Manual for Plant Managers. Washington, DC:
                 Chemical Manufacturers Association, 1988.
              Doheny-Farina, Stephen. Rhetoric, Innovation, Technology: Case Studies of Technical
                 Communications in Technology Transfer. Cambridge, MA: MIT P, 1992.
              Ehn,      Pelle.   Work-Oriented   Design   of Computer     Artifacts. Stockholm:
                    Arbetslivscentrum, 1988.
              Fiorino, Daniel. “Citizen Participation and Environmental Risk: A Survey of
                 Institutional Machanisms.” Science, Technology, and Human Values 15 (1990):
                    226-43.
              Foucault, Michel. “The Subject and Power.” Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism
                 and Hermeneuticsi. Ed. Hubert L. Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow. Chicago: U of
                 Chicago P, 1982. 208-26.
              Habermas, Jurgen. Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action. Trans. Christion
                    Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen. Cambridge, MA: The MIT P, 1990.
              Hance, B.J., Caron Chess, and Peter Sandman. Industry Risk Communication Manual:
                 Improving Dialogue with Communities. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis, 1990.
              Heath, Robert, and Kathy Nathan. “Public Relations’ Role in Risk Communication:
                 Information, Rhetoric, and Power.” Public Relations Quarterly 35.4 (1990): 15-22.
              Johnson, Robert R. User Centered Technology: A Rhetorical Theory of Computers and
                 Other Mundane Artifacts. Albany: SUNY P, in press.
              Johnson-Eilola, Johndan. “Relocating the Value of Work: Technical Communication
                  in a Post-Industrial Age.” Technical Communication Quarterly 5 (1996): 245-71.
              Jones, Dan. “A Question of Identity.” Technical Communication 42 (1995): 567-69.
              Juanillo, Napoleon K., and Clifford W. Scherer. “Attaining a State of Informed
                 Judgments: Toward a Dialectical Discourse on Risk.” Communication Yearbook. Ed.
                    Brant Burleson. New Brunswick, NJ: International Communication Association,
                  1994. 279-99.
              Katz, Steven. “The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the
                 Holocaust.” College English 54 (1992): 255-75.
              Katz,    Steven,     and   Carolyn   Miller.   “The    Low-Level     Radioactive      Waste   Siting
                 Controversy in North Carolina: Toward a Rhetorical Model of Risk
                 Communication.” Green Culture: Environmental Rhetoric in Contemporary America.
                 Ed. Carl Herndl and Stuart Brown. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1996. 111-40.
              Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1970.
              Latour, Bruno. Aramis or the Love of Technology. Trans. Catherine Porter. Cambridge,
                    MA: Harvard UP, 1996.
               Mirel, Barbara. “Debating Nuclear Energy: Theories of Risk and Purposes                          of
                  Communication.” Technical Communication Quarterly 3 (1994): 41-65.
                  Grabill, Simmons    #® Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk Communication   381

National Research Council. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: Managing the
   Process. Washington, DC: National Academy P, 1983.
Patterson, Robert, and Ronald Lee. “The Environmental Rhetoric of ‘Balance’: A
   Case Study of Regulatory Discourse and the Colonization of the Public.” Technical
   Communication Quarterly 6 (1997): 25-40.
Plough, Alonzo, and Sheldon Krimsky. Environmental Hazards: Communicating Risks
   as a Social Process. Dover, MA: Auburn House, 1988.
Porter, James E. Audience and Rhetoric: An Archaeological Composition of the Discourse
    Community. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992.
—. Rhetorical Ethics and Internetworked Writing. Greenwich, CT: Ablex and
    Computers and Composition, 1998.
Porter, James E., et. al. “(Re)writing Institutions: Spatial Analysis and Institutional
   Critique.” Unpublished.
Ross, Susan M. “Two Rivers, Two Vessels: Environmental Problem Solving in an
   Intercultural Context.” Earthtalk. Ed. Star Muir and Thomas Veenendall.
   Wesport, CT: Praeger, 1996. 171-90.
Rowan, Katherine. “Goals Obstacles, and Strategies in Risk Communication:            A
   Problem-Solving Approach to Improving Communication About Risks.” Journal
   of Applied Communication Research 19 (1991): 300-29,
—. “What Risk Communicators Need to Know: An Agenda for Research.”
   Communication Yearbook. Ed. Brant Burleson. New Brunswick, NJ: International
   Communication Association, 1994. 300-19.
—. “The Technical and Democratic Approaches to Risk Situations: Their Appeal,
   Limitations, and Rhetorical Alternative.” Argumentation 8 (1994): 391-409.
Rubin, D.M., and D.P. Sachs, eds. Mass Media and the Environment.           New   York:
   Praeger, 1973.
Russell, Milton. “Communicating Risk to a Concerned Public.” EPA Journal 12.9
    (1986): 19-21.
Sandman, Peter. “Getting to Maybe: Some Communications Aspects of Siting
   Hazardous Waste Facilities.” Readings in Risk. Ed. Thomas Glickman and Michael
  Gough. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 1990. 223-31.
Savage, Gerald J. “Redefining the Responsibilities of Teachers and the Social
   Position of the Technical Communicator.” Technical Communication Quarterly 5
    (1996): 309-27.
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, David Miller, and Jeffrey Doak. “The Technical Communicator
   as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority.” Journal of Business and Technical
  Communication 7 (1993): 12-36.
Slovic, Paul. “Informing and Educating the Public about Risk.” Risk Analysis 6
   (1986): 403-15.
Stratman, James E., et al. “Risk Communication, Metacommunication, and
   Rhetorical Stases in the Aspen-EPA Superfund Controversy.” Journal of Business
   and Technical Communication 9 (1995): 5-41.
Sullivan, Patricia, and James E. Porter. Opening Spaces: Writing Technologies and
   ‘Critical Research Practices. Greenwich,    CT: Ablex and Computers    and
    Composition, 1997.
Sullivan,    Dale   L.  “Political-Ethical Implications of Defining Technical
  Communication as a Practice.” Journal of Advanced Composition 10 (1990): 375-86.
382   Chapter 7 #® Professional Writers Produce Social Space


               Waddell, Craig. “Saving the Great Lakes: Public Participation in Environmental
                  Policy.” Green Culture: Environmental Rhetoric in Contemporary America. Ed. Carl
                  Herndl and Stuart Brown. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1996. 141-65.
               —. “Defining Sustainable Development: A Case Study in Environmental
                  Communication.” Technical Communication Quarterly 4 (1997): 201-16.
               —. Risk Communication Course Syllabus. Michigan Technological University.
                  Winter 1994-1995.
               Winner, Langdon. “Citizen Virtues in a Technological Order.”
               Technology and the Politics of Knowledge. Ed. Andrew Feenberg and Alastair Hannay.
                  Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1995. 65-84.
               Young, Iris Marion. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP,
                  1990.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Summarize what Grabill and Simmons mean when they assert that knowledge is made,
                and that knowledge-making is located within communication processes. Use an example
                to illustrate your discussion.
             2. Summarize how professional writers/risk communicators participate in “producing risk.”
             3. Explain how linear models of risk assessment/risk communication constrain the social
                space of professional writing, reducing it to “an impoverished rhetoric of ‘arrangement’
                and 'style’”
             4. Compare and contrast the social spaces produced by the technocratic, negotiated, and
                socially constructed approaches to risk. For each, describe what the professional writer
                does, and analyze how what she does contributes to producing a certain kind of social
                space.
              CHAPTER            7

              Projects
      1. Without referring to the term “social space,” interview a professional writer about the kind(s)
         of social space she has produced and would like to produce. To focus and concretize your in-
         terview, have the writer focus on two projects, one she has completed and one on which
         she is currently working. In addition to exploring the kind(s) of space she has and would to
         like to produce, find out how the writer participated in the production of this space (e.g.,
         working collaboratively, drafting texts, and/or managing writers). Then, produce a report
         (oral and/or written) that summarizes the kind(s) of space she has produced and still wants
         to produce, that summarizes the strategies they used to produce such space, and that assess
         the limits organizational contexts have placed on what they could/can produce.
          . Grabill and Simmons argue that professional writers can “construct risk communication
             practices that allow citizens (various publics) to represent themselves in decision making
             processes” by inserting usability and qualitative research methods into the risk assess-
ESHEETS
EEHE
ESO
             ment/risk communication process. That is, professional writers can reconstruct the social
 HHROHEHOEHOLHOHSHTH
 SHEHSSOHEOHOEHHOOOHER
 POSS
 SOSH


             space of risk so that citizens can more actively participate. However, Grabill and Simmons fail
             to acknowledge that in order to construct such social space, professional risk communica-
             tors, who typically work within and for governmental and industry organizations, must first
             reconstruct their own workplace social spaces in ways that make it possible for them to in-
             sert the research practices they suggest.
         In small research teams, study how professional writers, in general, have participated and
         can participate in reconstructing the social space of their immediate workplaces, so they can
         eventually have the space they need to insert new practices, like early qualitative research,
         into their work/writing processes. Construct a clear research plan, one that identifies the
         questions you would like to explore, the sources that you can use for each question, and the
         most effective research methods for exploring each question. Consider library research (for
         example, some of the sources in Professional Writing and Rhetoric and their bibliographies
         would lead you to helpful information), as well as field research (e.g., interviews with pro-
         fessional writers and disciplinary experts on your campus).
         Based on your research, develop a short report, written for professional writers, that lists and
         illustrates, perhaps through abbreviated cases/scenarios, how professional writers can par-
         ticipate in reconstructing the social space of their immediate workplace.
      . Several articles in this collection, just to identify a few in the field, suggest that professional
        writers reframe who they are either to better express the roles they are playing already or to
        help them carve out identities that better capture their expertise. For instance, Grabill and
        Simmons cite Johndan Johnson-Eilola’s argument that professional writers recast them-
        selves as “symbolic-analysts,” and in Chapter 2, Slack et al. argue that professional writers
        “rearticulate” themselves as “authors.” Redefining oneself, one’s work, and one’s field are
        ways people can produce new social space.

        As an act of producing the social space of professional writing, define what a professional
        writer is and does, and describe the kinds of workplace contexts—e.g., production processes,
        routine practices, structured social interactions, and technological access—that would best
        make it possible for professional writers to assume the role you define for them.


                                                                                                               383
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ®

a                               '      624          ©        aioe                                                                :                      ,        ae                    “Vv
.             ;                            “Eivtontg Sesomt isin mee *A - diaile                                                                            _Eeiiiiannese it) a
     _       ee                       “a                iad rienat                    )ett Aol             baie               aCe            ace: acuiy                        i           -_ 7              ’

                                                                                                                                                   with               a                                              7
                                                                     hatdy
|            sii 2 earvi ae;
                         Wibei
             a“ way SDs ie   ee                           br
                                                   oe nybet
                                         + fe ata7a!
                               op?or163e ioe                       at a arth vel vested -
                                                            ed ‘ywoe                                                                                                                                ®
             yer               24 Asch              ede        ~~ % uN yey ae                                    Grea ash toe vii ? paren ylinsm                      ge                            : -
|                    prays ee seins
                                9Lenhsey tm ane oR ape                                                                                                            eves                                           E
    Zz       ot 8 ahem= .e                                          —
                                                                Qe gy                         $d                 ates      pitt piemiiptedelin ation                                                .                    ;
             ite 3 st 1) seated                                      le                ay rind              ®‘a ee        aw?
                                                                                                                           a           eet nett                       aden )aad
                                                                                                                                                                              .                                          ;

7 >          andven thet ae tae LMG BHR sey                                                   me th emigataoc at vesnéerieme
                                                                                                                          Of? eho                                         at                       "e:
                                       don oe er yeaR tid.pa                                  es tetBe -sounyl on                                ee                       a    .                    .

-            nyt merd TE                                                      air RMLian ey       ire SOTO bind Gand .                                                                              2            WV
             piston ool aiaie hea                                             mas=cl, aid<,dé si sadivenanaabene                                                                                    >            &
             owes pH oh eighties                                              Hpet atten toni gggenic (Seine aateey                                                                                 :
             Ieewse ort Seep
                           me                                    odie Jame nivicw} @ fectl seeder? ce SACI                                                   Aan\tevsen                aed
             HelCosrcimet > (n> perma aogihinen tere seamen arith pad deebmasi
             Oe          ee ae ee sedcaabidilad                  nb Aah er lahteaxial ;
                                                 rlkanait ichniet Mt                           ee
             “tert Ln                      OTS hyut Lam sitel tap                          Maescomenreny         th bee. scien algal ReabaeaP ali?
              ni vt ire aE                                           © ae bawi &an © isha                                                   et Mah               EN                            :
                         49            gure     3                         °      ~-        % “geca                            eee            oe)            Ry ARAM            sr!                           7


             om          vai                  gi                    rivalsa ne oaur
                                                                  yes                                                   WE:          o 'eal ek                                ee =                           ee

             nay yok                       pees                           mare              atis ‘ine atheAe tc:ind fhaM                                              wee                                        q
ee  Same        ty ix ies wlll a _ tees raed 4d toon yet? @e  wot sari yawtewvs                                                                                                                :             i       ¥
|   eS. Sesh ie ba) daly een web 2terrKd Soon: srw ew Hal 28                                                                                                                           :
  : att tote cob op f 4 bod aceon ny of bane ate beeen 8 ail Bourne ry        >                                                                                                                                  i
;        _   wef tenes yo’ ofbarse) \u cles.ip ‘hat gnteoyen                                                          1) gbotien digendy Ores inter:                                                             7
             wet teppei O39 ye et bedt rgnaith Thm                                          ret ‘hes oa                  (0 en           wit ty serge             hegre                                          7
                  og Nine Ceteabe                        ge) \ncotebat aBen 0 Srctouriitel                                           lah—    OF katy        tl st blow >                                     =
                                                                                iar           Mey feat liege                          sal Cortes avis Ianroa                                                     9
              eon bind Dyed? eee barney ialpeeing                                                                whe 2 wen sbrtera                     ®73 ny nent                                  “og
 —                   a              Piet                 ees        Wk wirant ires a ‘in pai nligrere a i=eay maioreull                                                                                          7%
{=                         :                            winlighr: > amaiteerird tht 4 esac tetrne oni yal enicarnd eee                                                                             Soe
              tainty, me                        4       apo)    ee        gh!   Wi me) « qflizeai                hha      J
                                                                                                                          Kepeweae ae a ssthine letwrst                            bac
                                                                                                                                                                                     _                       A

              rs          frecla pale #4 yo elit ed asrgee ented                                                  ct larthe oe          Get ott Serna male
             hia          Bde)             sod           8      ee ieee Le paat a                      Ss              fat) genein wt 71x              "he: miertl ght                 ~
              qr               Hels          Pele              Siamese          ml ‘Oem iggy tien                           weeetick, rele trol: we serie?                                 :             a
              ttn               laqntest=           | wit age                 lee tt            £ warpac                toy “stingers aiednnys”
                                                                                                                                              Ye exyphse                                                 ~
              rw teat                                   eo       Ver          jceg         gntiiein® Senders"                            terrae “wouhoten®
                                                                                 ;                          anep hice ean baer acer                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                      =
              leet       idem        et! O Ule Tom are            geviinn tafeainesharig Amana                           Satye a0 yocrebang te
              gua              on     (4                * sien Pegs                  cons pe               is teriala      whoo a oo
              oe? fies                te))-oaeue                 geeiineay pie mois ewan Glee fi                                            aa     ee        -
     o                                     mer he 900 aed            rsBal een
                                                                            inpend ot eeatty lea
                                                                                               oust
                                                                                                 seal                                                       et
                                                                                 br                          -
                                                                                       i        -                 a
 eeeeacesase




  °
 e
  s
  e
  .
  °
  °
  e




                Becoming a
  .
  °
  e
  e
  e
  e
  °
  e




                Professional Writer
  °
  e
  *
  «
  2
  e
 .
 °
 .
 .
 e
 .
 e
 .
 °
 °
 .
 «
 °
 e
 °
 .
 .
 .
 .       N: matter how long any of us has been a professional writer, whether we are tak-
 °
 «
 .
 e
                ing our first class or have been studying and practicing professional writing for
 .
 .       many years, we are all always still “becoming a professional writer.” There are a num-
    e
    .
    °
         ber of other very good books that help professional writers with years of experience
    .
    °
    .
         and education become better writers. Professional Writing and Rhetoric, however, is
    .
    °
    .
         written for those of you who are in school and just starting into professional writing.
    °
    .
    e
         That could mean it is your first class on the subject; it could mean you are soon to be
    e
    ®
    °
         entering an internship or the job market; or it could mean that you have had some
   °
   .
    .
         background in writing but are just now exploring professional writing, especially as it
   °
   .
   °
         is related to rhetoric. No matter the case, Chapter 8 addresses your stage of “becom-
   .
   °     ing a professional writer.”
   «
   .
   *          The readings in Chapter 8 focus on the transition from school to the workplace,
   .
   °
   *     the stage you are or will soon be facing as a professional writer. As you will see in the
   .
   e
   .     readings, the transition from school to the workplace is not free of bumps and bruises.
   e
  °
   °
         Because it isn’t, many writers feel like they are leaving one “world” and moving into a
  °
  °
  e      completely different “world.” With this kind of thinking, it is hard to form links be-
  °
  e
  °      tween the two worlds, to see how they are different and yet to find ways that what
  °
  e
  °      one learns in one world is of value in the other. As a result, writers often feel like they
  @
  °
  e      are “starting over,” and they also often lose contact with knowledge and practices
  2
  e
  °      they learned in school that could be of great value in the workplace.
  e

 *
  e
             Chapter 8 focuses on the transition between school and the workplace, so you
  a

 *
  ®
         can form better linkages between the two worlds. By focusing on these linkages, you
 .
 a
 °       do not have to “start over.” Instead, you can see the transition itself as an important
 °
 2
 *
         and educational stage in your “becoming a professional writer.”
 °
 cy
 «
 .
 e
 .
 °
 s
 °
 °
°
.
°
°
e
>
@
a POSH   OHHHSEHSHAHHHOHESHHHSHFHSHHHSAHAHEDSHHHHHHHHHHOOD   PSO   SOSHTHEHHAHHEHEHRHOSHEHHHOOHHEHHEHHSH
                                                                                                    SHEDS
                                                                                                            385
                    H
               Se care
                             A
                             ae




            Writing Yourself into
            Professional Writing
            and Rhetoric

      INTRODUCTION
      Using school as a place to study professional writing and rhetoric and to develop the
      arts and practices of writing is of great value. In the workplace, no one has the job of
      helping you learn how to analyze organizational contexts, or helping you act ethi-
      cally, or helping you learn ways to work with readers to design documents that meet
      the needs of multiple audiences. In the workplace, you may find yourself feeling frus-
      trated because a routine form does not give you space to include what you see as crit-
      ical information. Or you may feel frustrated because you do not seem to be included
      early enough in the software product development processes to head-off what you see
      as “writing problems.” Even though you may feel these kinds of frustrations, no one in
      the workplace is responsible for helping you see them as issues of social space. No one
      will help you see that forms are ways of producing what we consider to be legitimate
      organizational knowledge, and that revising the forms can change what counts as
      knowledge within that organization. No one will help you see that a division-of-labor
      model of product development often creates “bad” technical documents because writ-
      ers are not included early enough in the “writing” process to intervene. These are the
      kinds of things school is designed to help you learn.
            However, what school gives is not enough. In the workplace, you learn things
      that school is not prepared or designed to teach you. For instance, even though you
      may have the chance to work on projects in school that include multiple audiences,
      the complexity and impact on your writing of such a situation will be felt nowhere
      like in the workplace. School environments also have a very difficult time recreating
      the absolute need for documents that you can only fully experience, appreciate, and
      learn to deal with in workplace experiences. In school, people rarely need to have the
      documents you create, but in the workplace, your documents will take on an air of
      necessity that can be a bit overwhelming. In this sense, workplace experience, either
      through employment or internships, offers you learning experiences that cannot be
      offered to you through school.

386
                                                                                          Introduction   387


    Chapter 8 includes readings that help you explore the bridges between school
and the workplace. As you read the selections in this chapter, keep the following
questions in mind:
    ¢ what are some of the situations you might find yourself facing as you are be-
      coming a practicing professional writer?
    ¢ how can you prepare for your transition from school to the workplace?
    @ what can you do once in the workplace to make your transition from school
      more effective?
    All of these questions assume that you have also examined how school and the
workplace are different. There are obvious differences between school and work, but
these are not the differences you need to examine. One difference that often goes un-
examined by writers is that what makes “good” writing in school is not necessarily
what makes good writing in the workplace. As you read the selections in Chapter 8,
think about how writing differs in terms, for instance, of purpose and function, audi-
ence, need, process, and collaboration.
     But you should also consider which school practices and knowledge can be of ad-
vantage to you once you enter the workplace. As outlined in the opening of this in-
troduction, school is designed to offer you knowledge and practices for which the
workplace is not, or poorly designed. And as you consider the knowledge and prac-
tices you have gained from school, think about how these can help you make success-
ful transitions into a practicing professional writer’s work.




  FOCUSING        ON KEY TERMS AND             CONCEPTS
  Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
  Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
  lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
  in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
  the field itself.
  1. lateral trarisfer
  2. vertical transfer
  3. alienated independence
  4, resolution

  This qualitative study examined the transitions that writers make when moving from aca-
  demic to professional discourse communities. Subjects were six university seniors
  enrolled in a special “writing internship course” in which they discussed and analyzed the
  writing they were doing in 12-week professional internships at corporations, small busi-
  nesses, and public service agencies in a major metropolitan area. Participant-observer
  and case-study data included drafts and final copies of all writing that the interns pro-
  duced on the job (including texts and suggested revisions by other employees), an ethno-
  graphic log of data and speculations arising from the group discussions, written course
  journals from each intern, transcriptions of taped, discourse-based and general interviews
  with the interns, and a final 15-page retrospective analysis of each intern’s writing on the
388   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric


              job. Results showed a remarkably consistent pattern of expectation, frustration, and
              accommodation as the interns adjusted to their new writing communities. The results
              have important implications for the lateral and vertical transfer of writing skills across dif-
              ferent communicative contexts.

           eeeseese    ee          *                                                      PROMS   RSOHHHHERERRHEHEEAEHHO
                                                                                                                       HHS



              MoviInNG BEYOND                                      THE ACADEMIC
               COMMUNITY:                        TRANSITIONAL STAGES
              IN PROFESSIONAL                                      WRITING
           CHHEKPHHRARTFSAKRERHORHHRGE    TE RSERHEEH   GAH   As              SOTA   OKEREHYEHEHREREEHHEHIHSHSHSERFBET
                                                                                                                   HOLES



              CHRIS M. ANSON,
              L. LEE FORSBERG
              University of Minnesota—Minneapolis/St.                           Paul

                      I guess I really screwed up on my last memos. The writing’s so much different
                      than I’m used to. One of my memos was too formal, the other was too touchy-
                      feely. Most of my immediate supervisors are relaxed here but the memos I’ve
                      seen are real formal and short and the language is relatively direct. But then
                      there’ll be something personal and witty. I don’t know. . . I guess the thing to
                      be understood is that lots of these writings are for upper management, and
                      they don’t have the time and energy to wade through a mess of expanded ma-
                      terial or complicated prose. In school, it’s always expand, expand. Here they
                      want the information quick, and so we gotta give them. . . I don’t know. I feel
                      like I’m back at square one. I used to think I was a pretty good writer. You
                      should see what my boss Chuck did to my last draft.
                                                                    —John, student intern at a large corporation

              Author's Note: The research reported in this study was made possible in part by a grant from the
              Office of Educational Development Programs, University of Minnesota—Twin Cities.


           Jes is a 21-year-old college senior writing for the first time in a professional set-
               ting. He is an excellent academic writer—an honors student with a high grade
           point average and a history of “A” grades for his course papers and essay exams. As
           this excerpt from one of his taped monologues reveals, however, John is having con-
           siderable difficulty writing in the context of his student internship at a large com-
           pany. Strategies that had worked well for him in college are no longer very effective,
           and he is unprepared to meet the demands of multiple readers whose status, power,
           and professional orientations vary considerably across departments and levels of the
           corporate hierarchy.
                John’s problems are also particular to his nonacademic setting—a high-power,
           “Fortune 500” organization with competent communicators. In a small company of

           Source: Anson, Chris M., and L. Lee Forsberg, “Moving Beyond the Academic Community: Transitional Stages in Professional
           Writing,” Written Communication 7.2 (April 1990), pp. 200-231, copyright © 1990 by Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted by
           permission of Sage Publications, Inc.
                               Anson, Forsberg    " Moving Beyond the Academic Community     389


low prestige, among professionals with less than effective writing abilities, John’s abil-
ities as an academic writer might place him in the opposite but equally difficult posi-
tion—a young novice wanting to give advice to his superiors, who have many years of
experience in the business world.
      In this article, we examine the transitions that writers make when they move
from an academic to a nonacademic setting and begin writing in a new and unfamil-
iar professional culture. While certain surface-level writing skills are “portable” across
diverse contexts, such skills are less important to making a successful transition as a
writer than coping with the unfamiliar epistemological, social, and organizational
characteristics of a new context. A writer in such a context is in many ways “illiter-
ate” until he or she begins to understand these characteristics and their manifestation
in written texts. Our research shows that becoming a successful writer is much more a
matter of developing strategies for social and intellectual adaptations to different pro-
fessional communities than acquiring a set of generic skills, such as learning the dif-
ference between the passive and the active voice. By documenting a cycle of expecta-
tion, struggle, and accommodation typical of our interns as they began writing in new
professional settings, we will support this developmental view and suggest some direc-
tions for further research on contextual adaptation and the transfer of writing ability.



BEYOND THE ACADEMY: WRITING
IN NONACADEMIC CONTEXTS
Recently, research on writing has begun to look more closely at the influence of con-
text on writers’ composing processes, particularly the way in which the social dimen-
sions of specific settings (e.g., audiences, purposes, assigned or imputed roles, institu-
tional ethos, and so on) influence writers’ rhetorical and linguistic decisions. As
Odell and Goswami (1984) have reminded us, writing does not exist independently
of the community in which it is immersed. Studying writing without considering the
importance of its context is, to borrow the words of Beach and Bridwell (1986), “a lit-
tle like studying animal life by visiting zoo cages” (p.6).
     Belief in the importance of context to communication is, of course, not new (for
an overview, see Harrison, 1987). Its rediscovery in the field of composition studies,
however, represents the development of a more social view of the writing process. In
contrast to literary or cognitive perspectives, social approaches to writing are inter-
ested in the relationship among writers, texts, and their surrounding context (Faigley,
Cherry, Jolliffe, & Skinner, 1985). Writing is seen as a socially constituted act,
shaped by the writer's “discourse community,” members of an organizational or intel-
lectual group who share specialized kinds of knowledge and textual competence (for
recent discussions, see Anson, 1987; Bazerman, 1979; Bizzell, 1982; Cooper &
Holzman, 1989; Faigley, 1985; Odell, 1985; Porter, 1986).
     Interest in the cultural, noetic, and organizational features of discourse commu-
nities has led some researchers to turn away from school settings, whose “discourse
communities [are] inevitably defined by the educational system” (Freed &
Broadhead, 1987, p.156) and whose writing tasks are typically “assigned by a teacher
or researcher in order to accomplish a pedagogical goal or provide data to answer a re-
search question” (Odell & Goswami, 1982, p. 201). For these scholars, school writing
390   Chapter 8 # Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



           is often rhetorically limited, used for what Britton, Burgess, Martin, McLeod, and
          Rosen (1972) have called “dummy-run” practice. Without rich, varied audiences and
          purposes, the consequences of such writing are substantially different from the writ-
          ing found in nonacademic settings.
               In exploring these differences, new studies of professional writing are showing
          some of the complex relationships between texts and contexts. Surveys across differ-
          ent vocations and job categories are revealing the quantities and varieties of writing
          required of professionals (for a review, see Anderson, 1985). Recent context-sensitive
           text analyses have pointed to relationships between the formal features of a text and
           its surrounding social and rhetorical situation (Bazerman, 1981; Colomb & Williams,
           1985; Fahnestock, 1986; Miller & Selzer, 1985; Secor & Fahnestock, 1982). Analyses
           of entire organizations (Doheny-Farina, 1983; Fred & Broadhead, 1987; Knoblauch,
           1979; Paradis, Dobrin, & Miller, 1985), as well as case studies of individual writers
           working within organizations or professions (Brown & Herndl. 1986; Gould, 1980;
           Odell, Goswami, & Herrington, 1983; Selzer, 1983), are further showing us how texts
           are shaped by what Odell (1985) has called the “internalized values, attitudes, knowl-
           edge, and ways of acting that are shared by other members of the organization”
           (p.250). Writing, in other words, cannot be seen apart from its functions in various
           social, administrative, and managerial processes. As Cooper (1986) has put it, the
           “characteristics of any individual writer or piece of writing both determine and are
           determined by the characteristics of all the other writers and writings in the [socially
           constituted] systems” (p.368).
                The recognition that contexts, writers, and texts are in a dynamic state of evolu-
           tion and mutual influence holds much promise for a fuller understanding of what
           Brandt (1986) has called the “public conditions” through which writers in profes-
           sional settings must try to share meaning. An excellent way in which to understand
           the role of such conditions and their influence on the writing process is to study what
           happens when members of one discourse community begin to write in another, rela-
           tively unfamiliar community. Some preliminary work has examined differences be-
           tween writers of similar age and experience in two different communities. Ordell,
           Goswami, and Quick (1983), for an example, studied two similar groups of writers
           working in different rhetorical domains: (a) five, young, recently-hired legislative an-
           alysts employed by a state legislature; and (b) five university undergraduates with aca-
           demic preparation that might make them good candidates for similar positions in
           state or federal government. Comparisons of the writing of these two groups revealed
           fundamental differences in the tasks, audiences, purposes, information, and evalua-
           tive methods underlying each context, and these differences had important effects on
           the thinking and composing processes of each group. Similar findings have also been
           reported from research on the accommodations that students must make when writ-
           ing in different academic disciplines, where assumptions about writing on a “profes-
           sional”   level   vary   considerably   (see, for example,   Faigley   &   Hanson,   1985;
           Herrington, 1985; McCarthy, 1987).
                Virtually no research, however, has explored the transitions that writers make as
           they move into new and unfamiliar writing contexts. If, as Piazza (1987) has asserted,
           social norms, roles and relationships, status, and other social factors constrain the
           functions and uses of writing in a particular setting (p.113), then studying the transi-
                                Anson, Forsberg   = Moving Beyond the Academic Community     391


tions that writers make in a new setting may inform us further not only about the na-
ture of those constraints but also about how one learns to accommodate them.


FROM ACADEMIA TO THE PROFESSIONS:
THE WRITING INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
In this study, we chose to focus on an important transition that all writers make
when they move beyond the academic community and begin working in profes-
sional settings. Our subjects were six college seniors at the University of Minnesota
who were conducting professional internships in and around the twin cities of
Minneapolis and St. Paul. Because most of these students had little or no experience
writing in a professional setting but had become quite accustomed to writing at a
major university, we felt that the differences in the two types of contexts would re-
veal the problems that writers face when moving between discourse communities
and thus suggest more clearly some of the adaptive processes that writers undergo in
new professional settings.
     In the pilot phase of an educational development project at the University of
Minnesota, we offered a special “writing internship” course. This course was designed
for students whose internships required them to do a significant amount of writing.
Most of the internships were full-time positions lasting from 10 to 15 weeks. Sponsors
for the positions were quite varied, including major corporations, small businesses,
public service agencies, local utilities, newspaper offices, and art museums. The kinds
of writing demanded of the interns ranged within and across these settings from
singly authored memos, press releases, news features, and informal surveys to collabo-
ratively written reports, feasibility studies, grant proposals, and recommendations to
upper management for funding various projects.
     Instead of using a traditional pedagogy, that is, presenting principles of composi-
tion or asking the students to write practice essays, we taught the internship course as
a workshop involving group analyses of the participants’ work-related drafts and dis-
cussions of issues in their writing. One of us (Forsberg) played the rose of teacher/eval-
uator, coordinating the classes, leading the discussions, making assignments, and as-
sessing the students’ work at the end of the course. The other (Anson) played the role
of participant, observer, attending the sessions, taking notes, joining in the discussions
as appropriate, and reflecting on the issues raised by the group. In this way, we were
able to gather and analyze data from two different perspectives: (a) helpful (though fi-
nally authoritative) facilitator, and (b) interested and engaged observer.
     We wanted a research methodology that would blend productively and unobtru-
sively with the internship course. Our method was essentially qualitative, allowing us
to collect and examine a greater variety of simultaneously gathered data than might
have been possible using other methods (for representative discussions, see Green &
Wallat, 1981). We collected everything that the interns were writing, in both draft
and final form. We kept logs of data and speculations arising from the group discus-
sions. We asked the interns to keep a course journal in which they explored their
thoughts about (a) writing on the job, (b) the texts they were seeing there, and (c)
whatever guidance or suggested revisions they were getting from their supervisors or
fellow employees. We also conducted a series of general and “discourse-based” inter-
392   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric


           views (Odell, Goswami, & Herrington, 1983), which we tape-recorded, transcribed,
           and analyzed. At regular intervals during the course, we also asked the interns to turn
           on a tape recorder and reflect aloud on their experiences. For their final course paper,
           interns produced a 10- to 15-page retrospective analysis of their writing on the job.
                Because the interns knew that we were interested in their experiences as part of
           our pilot project with the internship course, these data-gathering techniques neither
           intruded on the natural setting of the classroom nor placed the interns in an overtly
           “experimental” situation, which might have affected their behaviors or their reports
           to us about what they were thinking and doing (see Tomlinson, 1984). Instead, they
           were aware simply that they straddled two contexts—one academic and one profes-
           sional—and that in the former, they would be analyzing and coming to a fuller under-
           standing of what they were doing in the latter.
                In selecting the six case-study subjects, we favored students who would be doing
           a considerable amount of writing on the job and who had performed well as academic
           writers. Because we wanted to examine the transitions of fairly competent writers, we
           limited our selection of majors to English and journalism, both of which provide stu-
           dents with a fairly strong background in writing and communication skills. Beyond
           these preferences, we aimed for as much diversity as possible in the subjects’ age, prior
           experience, attitudes, and internship positions. The six subjects are identified here:

               Jim, 20, a journalism major, worked for a nonprofit educational organization in
                    Minneapolis, writing public relations materials. Jim had previously worked
                    in telephone sales.
               Louise, 21, an English major, worked for a nonprofit arts organization, research-
                    ing and writing request letters and grants. Louise had previously worked for a
                    short time as a secretary in a small firm.
               Joan, 35, a returning student, was completing a journalism degree. She worked as
                    an intern for a very small public relations agency, writing pitch letters and
                    press releases. Joan had been a clerical worker for a large corporation.
               Paula, 38, also a returning student, was completing an English degree. She
                    worked as an unpaid feature writer for a weekly suburban newspaper. She had
                    worked as an administrative assistant in a government office.
               Rachel, 22, was an English major working as an intern for a two-person company
                    that caters theme parties for corporations. She was mainly responsible for
                    writing brochures and letters. Rachel had previously worked as a secretary in
                    a bank.
               Betsy, 21, an English major, worked as an intern in a large, nonprofit theater or-
                    ganization, writing public relations and fund-raising materials. She had pre-
                    viously worked for the Red Cross and a small theater group.


           THE STUDY: STAGES OF TRANSITION
           The wealth of data from journals, papers, logs, taped monologues, interviews, and
           workplace texts provided us with a number of issues to examine: how writers in a new
           context perceive and adapt to complex and unfamiliar audiences, how they learn to
           use the language of their workplace, how they make connections and distinctions be-
                               Anson, Forsberg    = Moving Beyond the Academic Community     393


tween experiential and academic learning, how they describe the influence of the con-
text on their texts, how they revise those texts, and what motivates their revisions.
      In the early stages of our study, we expected to find that the interns all underwent
unique transitions, unrelated to each other's experiences and therefore revealing only
individual differences. As we collected and worked through the data from our six sub-
jects, however, an unexpected but consistent pattern began to emerge. During the
course of their internships, the students appeared to pass through several distinct
stages as they adjusted to their writing contexts—stages marked by qualitative differ-
ences in the way they described their writing. This pattern became even more dis-
cernible when, focusing on our accumulating data, we saw that the same cycle of
transition in all the accounts, regardless of the student’s age, previous experience or
academic writing skill, or specific work context. Within this cycle, the exact point at
which a student experienced each stage, with what intensity, and for what length of
time, varied considerably according to both the individual and the nature of the
workplace, but that variance in itself suggests some new ways of thinking about the
interplay between the individual writer and the writing context.
    The relevance of this cycle of transition, we believe, is not just that it presents as
interesting chart of a learning or developmental process, but that it reflects the rela-
tionship between the writer’s new context and the way he or she begins to “read” it. In
order to write at all, in order to produce texts that become transactionally real, writers
must first be able to adopt a persona appropriate to their position in the workplace, ac-
ceptable to themselves, their superiors, and other eventual audiences of their writing.
Although the word “audience” seems woefully inadequate here, it is a process of audi-
ence analysis that enables the adoption of such a persona, and there is no understand-
ing of audience that more fully constitutes a text than the writer’s perception of his or
her immediate context, the workplace. The writer must first become a “reader,” and
the process of that reading must occur in a dynamic context of interpersonal action
and adaptation (see Forsberg, 1987). The cycle of transition, then, impinges on and
eventually informs writing decisions in the ongoing process of creating texts.
     At the most general level, we identified from our data three stages of transition
through which the interns passed as they moved from academic to nonacademic writ-
ing. Each of these may be further elaborated by some specific characteristics:
    1. Expectation. In this preinternship stage, the writer builds a vision, that is,
        a social construct, of his- or herself working and writing in a new profes-
        sional setting. Often, the picture is idealized, particularly if the student has
        been a reasonably successful writer in college. The image provides the
        impetus for often intense motivation to perform well. Occasionally, perhaps
       because the new context is perceived as different from the known acade-
        mic context, the intern may express some apprehension about applying his
       or her knowledge to the new situation.
    2. Disorientation. As the individual tries to determine a role in the organiza-
       tion, he or she becomes disoriented, and this in turn can lead to intense
       frustration and a sense of failure. The characteristics of disorientation, how-
       ever, may take several forms. Some interns undergo a period of alienated
       independence, a sense of having to do things all on their own, of being
       expected to know already how to execute tasks and being apprehensive
394   Chapter 8 =    Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



                    about consulting others, and of not knowing how, or when it is appropri-
                    ate, to ask for information. The frustration that results from the struggle to
                    understand new tasks in a still unfamiliar setting often leads the writer to
                  evaluate the nature and quality of knowledge in the workplace, and this
                  process of evaluation in turn may lead to personal and professional conflict.
               3. Transition and Resolution. As the writer begins to establish a role and forms
                  new knowledge for adaptation, he or she may begin to take on greater init-
                  iative, understanding what is expected and forming new self-concepts. This
                  initiative usually leads to rewards and responsibility, culminating in a
                  resolution of previous frustration and often of conflict as well. The individ-
                  ual finally integrates experience and reflects on the intellectual changes
                  afforded by writing in the new context.
               For economy, we will illustrate each part of this cycle (and its more specific char-
          acteristics) by drawing on the data from the six interns. While all six interns showed
          a general process of transition involving the three stages that we have described, we
          do not mean to suggest that they did so in the same way or to the same degree.
          Organizing a human learning process into entirely discrete categories is impossible,
          except on a theoretical level. In reality, there is considerable concurrent develop-
          ment and “learning at the boundaries” of any of these stages. Learning and adaptation
          do not take place linearly; while one kind of knowledge may be developing very
          quickly, another may develop slowly or recursively. Attitudes may fluctuate, linger, or
          recur before being integrated. One rationale for identifying discrete stages of the
          adaptive process, however, is to specify those attitudinal patterns that can be consid-
          ered typical. This heuristic can then provide a backdrop against which to analyze fur-
          ther data that appear to deviate from the norm.


          Expectation
          The students studies had various motivations for participating in an internship, rang-
          ing from a desire to explore something new and unfamiliar to a desire to take a first
          step on an already-established career path. Their feelings about the coming work ex-
          perience also varied, but in each case, both motivations and expectations set the
          stage for the ways in which they would begin interpreting and adapting the their
          writing context.
               Louise’s expectations were characterized by a desire to explore and discover her
          own occupational future. As one of her early journal entries reflects, she was both ex-
          cited and uncertain about writing in a new setting:

               I don’t know exactly what I want to be doing five years from now. I’m very interested in
               the major I have chosen, and I like my classes—but what can I do with them? What do I
               want to do with them?. . . |came across a grants research internship. Up to now I had no
               knowledge of grant writing, and no interest in it. .. 1became increasingly interested. . . I
               started thinking about maybe pursuing this as a possible career.

                Joan had decided on a particular career and saw the internship as an opportunity
           to take an active role in selecting an experience. She voiced her decision in an inter-
           view:                                                                           :
                                 Anson, Forsberg      ® Moving Beyond the Academic Community       395


    I knew I wanted to get into PR... When I approached the internship, I knew it was
    something I wanted to do, and I looked forward to it. It was something I sought, this par-
    ticular job with this particular person in this particular environment. | had very methodi-
    cally and logically looked for what I wanted and gone after it. Most of the things before
    had simply crossed my path, and I had said, OK.

     A desire to be important in his new setting and to make a difference in the work-
place was stronger for Jim than for any of our other interns. In an early log entry, one
of us wrote that “Jim has a lot of expectations going into this internship. As he put it,
he expects to get there and ‘go gangbusters.”
     Rachel, another explorer, saw her internship as an opportunity to experience
writing as a career. In her final paper, she wrote:
    I was excited about the prospect of having a job where what I did was write. . . I [imagined
    I] would come to work, spend my time writing in the back room, and sometimes even
    bring the work home with me. . . To have the desire to take any work home was amaz-
    ing—this job was different. | was excited, thrilled with the prospect of being able to test
    my abilities.

     As these excerpts suggest, there was a strong tendency for the interns to look pos-
itively ahead to their experiences as writers in nonacademic settings, and their antic-
ipation often carried them through the first few days on the job. Most had done well
in college and felt that the applications of their knowledge to a new setting would be
challenging and interesting. What they were not prepared for, however, was finding
themselves in a setting requiring not the “lateral” transfer of the skills they had
learned in college, but the “vertical” transfer of situationally rooted knowledge—of
what Teich (1987) has claimed is almost entirely a function of the context and con-
tent of a specific rhetorical situation (p. 198). Such knowledge allows one to make
choices about how to think, how to organize experience, and how to express ideas co-
herently for solving problems in a particular discourse community (p. 197). For ex-
ample, after remarking in her paper (quoted above) that she was thrilled with the
prospect of being able to test her abilities, Rachel went on to write: “But what I found
was an arena where all the rules had changed and no one could remember where the
rulebook went.” Much like being pushed suddenly into a pool, the interns’ immersion
in a new culture left them shocked and disoriented.

Disorientation

It is mundane to observe that life experiences seldom match expectations. Much of
the disorientation expressed by the interns soon after they began writing on the job,
however, originated not only from the disappointment of generally held expecta-
tions, but from the collision of what they saw in their new reality and what they had
learned from previous experience in other discourse settings. For example, in her
course paper, Rachel described the sudden shock of her new writing context:
    I was thrust into an environment [for which] | was less prepared than | thought. . . I was
    so used to professors basically telling you exactly what they want from you that I expected
    to be, if not taught, then told, what exactly it was that they wanted these brochures to ac-
    complish. . . They have not taken the time to discuss it—they just put things on my desk
    with only a short note telling me when they needed it done. No directions or comments
396   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric


               were included. | do not expect to be instructed, but I do expect some guidance.

          This “shock,” as the following excerpt from a teaching log about Jim suggests, may
          have its source in too grandiose an image during the earlier stage of expectation:
               Coming out of sales, Jim has a hard time dealing with the prevalent attitude at —, a
               non-profit organization. He doesn’t understand why they don’t have a more positive atti-
               tude, more of a “go get ’em” spirit.
           Ironically, not being able to identify their role in the office often inhibited the in-
           terns’ ability to find out what was expected of them. Jim’s sanguine attitude at the
           start of his internship soon turned to frustration as he tried to balance his sense of
           self-esteem as a writer with the need for guidance:
               In other jobs I’ve had, like the office job I had this summer, if you had a question you
               would look through kind of a catalog situation to find the answer or maybe go talk to
               someone if you absolutely could not find it. Here if you have question, you automatically
               have to go to someone.

               Likewise, a journal entry from Betsy revealed a struggle to find a professional role
           acceptable to both herself and her colleagues—a struggle which had profound effects
           on her persona as a writer:
               I am finding it difficult to find the point between complete shy quietness and rambunc-
               tiousness where I am comfortable. People have been commenting on how quiet I am and
               I fell uncomfortable being too quiet, but don’t know anyone well enough yet to joke
               around. . . | realize that an internship is what you make it and you only get out what you
               put in and all that, but | am not sure how much is “putting in” and how much is being an-
               noying and bothersome.

                Similarly, Rachel described her small office as a place where the other three em-
           ployees have “established their space... I can almost feel the invisible walls I’m
           about to walk through. They all have dominant personalities.”
                Customarily, independence on the job means having responsibility with a certain
           amount of freedom or autonomy. Our interns, however, felt neither free from supervi-
           sion not, paradoxically, able to rely on it for help; they were expected to know already
           how to execute assigned tasks on their own. Reluctant to show how much they did
           not know by asking for information, they felt isolated, alone, and disconnected from
           the rest of the workplace. This perceived independence was sometimes overwhelm-
           ing: too much responsibility, too much time on their own, too much expected of
           them—and too little guidance, as Joan remarked in her journal:
               I also found myself becoming quite frustrated when I was left on my own for long periods
               of time... As I am part-time, a lot of things are handled by [the supervisor]. The busier
               she gets, the less 1 know about what’s going on.

               From a teaching log about Jim:
               Jim’s first memory of working at — was sitting at his desk chain-smoking, drinking Coke
               and staring at a blank piece of paper thinking, “My God, I’ve got to do this.” He recalls
               being incredibly anxious, and said, “All that independence was really overwhelming.”
               From Rachel’s journal:
                                  Anson, Forsberg      ® Moving Beyond the Academic Community         397


    I’m not used to being given so much responsibility so soon. I wonder how many people
    walk into the job feeling so bold and sassy and then when given a task with no real def-
    nites along with it can breeze through, take the responsibility, and do a good job. The way
    they want it. I have to anticipate what result they want, what they want to accomplish, in
    a very short time. The bosses are extremely busy in this little office and apparently they
    don’t have the time or maybe the inclination to sit down and tell me what they want. If I
    sound timid, that’s exactly the way I’m feeling right now. This is my first real writing job
    and I’m more than a little scared.

And from an interview with Louise:

    [ just remember from the beginning, feeling like I was being abandoned. Then later on I
    realized that it was probably better that [the supervisor] wasn’t there . . . Because I knew if
    she was there, if | had a little question—I’d ask her. I’d want to ask her. And sometimes
    you have to ask a lot of questions. But sometimes it’s better not to, because a lot of times
    it’s things that you can figure out on your own if you just put a little more thought into it.
    So at first | was a little bit lonely, because I thought I’d have problems.

     Of all the interns, Jim experienced the perceived isolation of his role in the office
with the most intensity. He also held the highest expectations of his own perfor-
mance and of his job. He began work feeling that he already knew how to write press
releases because he had done so in class, unlike other interns who knew they would
be confronting new writing tasks. Later, he found that “for the press releases, the cor-
relation between what we did in class and what I actually had to do in the outside
world wasn’t close enough that learning it in class for J[ournalism]-school was that
important, I guess... I’ve never written anything that short and been so worried
about it before.”
     Jim also began work under a supervisor who, he wrote in his journal, “seemed to
be a bad combination of highly critical and usually absent.” She would hand pieces of
writing back to him two or three times to be redone but (aside from some minor edit-
ing) with little guidance about how to revise. Like the other interns, he was anxious
about the implication that he was “already supposed to know how to do whatever the
job required.”
     In all the cases, the interns’ perceived independence eventually gave way to a
stage of sometimes intense frustration, particularly when they found it impossible to
adjust quickly and easily to their new role, perform new tasks with little guidance,
and communicate with their supervisor (either to understand what was expected of
them or to confess the need for help). As an excerpt from Louise’s journal suggests,
the interns were still coping with a great deal of uncertainty:
    Right now it frustrates me that I can’t write them [business letters] faster, but I have to re-
    member that I’m new at this. One of my problems is patience—I expect to jump into a
    new job and know all about it and what to do right away. Realistically, this is impossible.
    It takes time to learn these things—especially when I’m on my own.

This sense of frustration and failure often originated, as Joan pointed out, from lack of
knowledge about the conventions of the writing context:
    [The supervisor] needed 3 releases done and in 5 hours | didn’t even finish one. I felt to-
    tally incompetent by the end of the day. [The supervisor] didn’t seem to think it was a big
398   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric
                                                                                  roe



               deal. She said I shouldn’t be so hard on myself—that it would come in time. This com-
               ment was no help at all. I’ve written press releases before and still have not been able to
               increase my speed. I think the problem centers around a formula and around my insecu-
               rity. What do they actually want? What is the most important part of the release? Can I
               call other people for more information? Am | doing this correctly?

          Rachel, reflecting on learning a new writing task, expressed similar feelings:
               They want more hype. Oh perfect. | was having trouble with the hypersell writing so I
               compromised with a blend. I’ve never had any experience of this sort so I’m finding it dif-
               ficult... These descriptions are difficult because | haven’t been [at the events] and all I
               can work with are pictures and their old descriptions. | may go by mood.

           Interestingly, in the early stages of frustration, the interns typically looked on their
           supervisors as caretakers and providers, and for this reason were willing to accept su-
           pervisors’ criticisms and guidance—whenever offered—as a way of releasing uncer-
           tainty. For example, in an interview, Jim told us about
               a thick skin that I think I’ve developed—every time I’d write a little press release. . . and
               every single time they weren’t satisfied with it. “Jim, can I speak to you for a minute?” | could-
               n’t write one without [this process]. You just have to come to the conclusion that it’s not a
               personal attack, it’s just, you know. . . an attack on your writing. You just have to sit there and
               smile and nod and try to take their hints and their clues and what they really want.

           Paula’s journal also shows this mixed reaction to criticism:
               Initially, it was little intimidating. . . for the first interview in particular I was just told,
               why don’t you do that article on —- that I had suggested. I said, O.K. Any pointers? And |
               was just told to be really accurate with my quotes.

               Unable to resolve their frustration with limited guidance, however, many of the
           interns began noticing an adversarial quality in their relationships with their supervi-
           sors. At some point, for example, most of the interns’ views of how things should be
           written or done began to conflict with those of their supervisors. Because the interns
           lacked security in their own roles, these conflicts seemed particularly threatening,
           and they reacted strongly. But this stage also seems closely associated with initiative,
           as the interns began to assert their own opinions against those presented in the work-
           place, to strengthen and define their own role by imitation or contrast. In her journal,
           Joan remarked on a growing conflict:
               [The supervisor] has also been getting a lot more testy about getting something done fast.
               I think that a problem is developing here. | feel that | need more research and she goes for
               the “quick and dirty” approach. I have a very hard time feeling comfortable with that.

           Likewise, Paula’s log showed the beginnings of a transition from insecurity to conflict:
               When I saw the. . . story I was furious. My opening paragraph had been changed again by
               the editor. It affected the whole lead-in that I had worked so hard on. The opening
               sounds boring to me now. .. What | think makes a story interesting she eliminates. I also
               think the humor should have been left in my bicycle lead-in. Maybe it’s typical to resent
               any changes made to one’s work—although some of the changes I do agree with so it’s not
               entirely a case of sour grapes on my part.
                                   Anson, Forsberg      " Moving Beyond the Academic Community           399


And Rachel’s summary described a conflict of knowledge and authority when she ar-
gued with her superiors about some grammatical details:

    You expect a professor to know grammar and syntax. . . [That you know] where to put the
    comma in a series [is] a given. [I had to discuss this] with one of my supervisors. I turned
    out to be right on this issue and that somehow made him very nervous. He still wanted
    me to write it his way on his correspondence because that was the way he had always
    done it and he doesn’t want some “kid” to tell him the correct way of doing it. . On one
    hand, I don’t want them to think I am trying to overhaul the way they write, and on the
    other hand, I would like to send out material that I’m happy with, that is done correctly.

It is interesting to note in this excerpt how both Rachel’s and her supervisor's sense of
authority on the matter of surface correctness originates in their static view of the
conventions of discourse—as “fixed” and unalterable. Many such conventions, as
those of us working across disciplinary contexts well know, are much less universal
than our educators prepared us for.
      More subtle than the conflict produced by differing views of how to do some-
thing in the office is the internal conflict produced by an inability to receive guidance
from the supervisor or to evaluate the supervisor as a role model and, by either means,
gauge one’s own performance. As we reflected on our interviews with Paula, we wrote
the following in our field log:                                    .

    [Paula] also has conflicting attitudes toward her editor. She looks to her for guidance in
    her writing, as a role model for her as a journalist, and as a source of writing models. She
    receives little guidance from her, however, and finds that when she reads articles her edi-
    tor has written, she can’t read them easily and has a hard time extracting the information.
    Yet she can’t analyze what’s “wrong” and feels unqualified to criticize.

This difficulty finding an appropriate role for collaboration and critique is also re-
flected in an interview with Louise:

    {My academic] papers get a lot more writing on them. A lot more corrections. I’m not sure
    if [the supervisor] really did think that what I wrote was fine. . . or if she’s not real particu-
    lar about the way I said things.

Although the source of the supervisors’ resistance to provide evaluative feedback may
have come from the position of the intern as a “terminal employee,” it had serious
consequences for many of the writers’ self-esteem, as Jim suggested in his journal:

    I did get input on my writing but that was basically it, and usually negative. As an exam-
    ple, the time cards had a place for [her] signature as my boss, and just above this were
    boxes to be checked if my work was satisfactory or unsatisfactory; | would be paid regard-
    less. I waited patiently for my first time card to fill up so I could see what her basic opinion
    would be. I brought it into her office then left so she could think and check without hav-
    ing me over her shoulder. The time card came back unchecked! The only authentic job
    input I received, besides on my writing, was a thoroughly disgusted look and body move-
    ment after I told her I had missed paper deadlines, which I rightfully deserved.
406   Chapter 8 # Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               The sense of conflict cannot be underestimated in this cycle of transition, in this
          process of learning to read the context. In the course of our work with the interns, we
          found quite often that supervisors gave very unilateral directives about writing
          (“don’t ever use humor,” for instance, as a general rule for journalistic writing) or
          gave students samples of their own or others’ work as models that represented very
           poor writing.
                Experienced journalists can weigh a new editor’s advice against what they al-
           ready know and evaluate it accordingly. Someone seasoned in a particular work
           context can understand that an employee can be a poor writer but an excellent
           fundraiser, for example, and so make balanced judgments about what writing tech-
           niques, formats, or conventions to “borrow.” Lacking the knowledge to make such
           judgments, however, the interns reached eagerly for anything that sounded like a
           rule or looked like a model; it was something they could imitate to complete their
           work and fulfill their role. Although supervisors are not formally teachers in the
           workplace, new employees automatically look to them for rules, vesting them with
           a universal rectitude. As Jim put it in his journal: “I automatically assumed all per-
           sons, specifically my boss, operating within [this environment] were basically right
           because it was their home environment, and I was wrong. When the interns’ own
           knowledge or education caused them to doubt or disagree, however, it threw them
           into a quandary. If they rejected one precept, they felt that they should reject them
           all because they had no basis for judging which advice to follow and which to dis-
           count. The dilemma hampered their ability to learn from their context. When
           their evaluative process clashed with the received wisdom, the interns doubted
           themselves.
                For the interns, then, resolving conflict meant realizing not only that the rules
           are different in a new context but also that their role models may not be the best ex-
           emplars of those rules. The question, “This was the right way to do it in school, but is
           it the right way to do it here?” is more easily resolved than the question, “Is this per-
           son, his work, and his advice a good model for success in this arena?” The second
           question follows from the first, and is more difficult to answer; it is also more central
           to building a self-concept as a nonacademic writer.
                The inability of the interns to answer the second question with certainty—in-
           deed, their very resistance to asking it, particularly because years of schooling had
           militated against doubting the wisdom of authority—sometimes led to further inter-
           nal conflict as they sought validation for their performance. Jim never really reached
           a balance in his evaluation of his first supervisor; she left before he could resolve his
           conflicts. She responded negatively to his writing, but the data—primarily samples of
           her own writing and suggestions that she made to Jim for his—reveal her to be a poor
           writer and model. Yet Jim continued to want some indication that she thought he
           was performing his job well.
                Louise, who had one of the most positive experiences of the group and had been
           praised for her work, was still left wondering if she had, in fact, learned to write “well”
           by the standards of her workplace. For an evaluation to be meaningful, the evaluator
           must be respected; the grants and letters given to Louise as models were poorly writ-
           ten. Against what criteria, then, could Louise ever begin to rate herself as being a
           good writer? For Louise, the answer lay in taking action.
                                  Anson, Forsberg      ® Moving Beyond the Academic Community         401


Transition and Resolution
Conflict and initiative seemed to be relatively concurrent stages in the cycle of transi-
tion for our interns. Initiative was a response to certain kinds of frustration and an
eventual release from them. From what we observed, however, conflict may continue
indefinitely—a tendency reflected in many business settings where well-adjusted, com-
petent employees work with (and often thrive on) disagreements with their colleagues.
     For our interns, personal frustrations centered on their role in the workplace and
could not be resolved without some action. Most of our writers look initiative to gain
experience in their internship and to make a contribution in the workplace. It
seemed to be a point at which they could merge their own goals with those of the or-
ganization. Joan, for example, asked for opportunities to gain experience beyond the
internship, and gave her supervisor a list of career objectives that she wanted to
achieve. In her internship, Louise was primarily responsible for collecting research;
grant writing was no more than a possibility. In an interview, she told us how she at-
tended a grant writing seminar on her own before being assigned to write one:

     I have a feeling that if [the supervisor] didn’t know that I was taking this class, she would-
     n’t have asked me to write [a grant]. But knowing. . . that it was a writing class, and that |
     needed exciting things to do rather than just look up foundations and write letters to
     them—I don’t remember what I asked her. I think we were talking about this class and if I
     was getting enough information that | needed and... then she asked me if I wanted to
     write one.

At other times, the interns had to assert themselves to get information they needed
to write. More at ease in confronting her supervisors and insisting on useful feedback,
Rachel made an appointment to see her bosses to “test” their judgments:

    | [wanted to] pin them down on the simplest of issues. I tried to convince them to set the
    mood in the first part of the descriptions and to include pricing and options. Now I can
    proceed. . . How does it feel? It feels good. I almost think they were waiting to see if I had
    enough gumption to make them talk about it.

    Jim, who earlier had struggled intensely in his internship, showed initiative by de-
signing a project to get his agency some free time on a local television program. He
thought the exposure would help raise enrollment in the agency’s classes, but he met pas-
sive resistance and negative comments when he proposed it. His goals apparently did not
merge with those of the organization, as reflected in an observation from our log:

    I asked Jim if he was sure they wanted to increase their class enrollments or if maybe they
    already has as much as they could comfortably handle. The expression on his face was
    wonderful when he said he didn’t know—it had never occurred to him that increased
    class enrollments might not be desirable.

    Transitional learning experiences are those points at which the intern develops
an understanding of the context that facilitates his or her work—and writing. In the
incident above, Jim had apparently misread the needs and goals of his organization.
The failure of his attempt to take initiative brought another possibility to his atten-
tion, a factor that he can use to interpret other events. At this stage, therefore, foiled
402   Chapter 8    #   Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric

                                                                                   re


          initiative does not seem to hurl one back into frustration and conflict; rather, it often
          leads to transitional learning experiences because mistakes test the context and force
          a more direct-communication of information. In her final project, Rachel offered us a
          concise overview of the process:
              I’m still learning how my supervisors think and operate and | think J have a better grip on
              how they want things done now. It has come to me through trial and error, though, but
              sometimes that is why it sticks in your head. It’s a hard way to learn at times and | wonder
              if my supervisors see mistakes the way I do. I see them as building blocks and not as any
              indication that you aren’t understanding what you’re supposed to do.

               Having had to rewrite her last feature story because it was too short, Paula’s jour-
          nal entry about her next assignment read:
               I was prepared to elaborate and make this review fairly lengthy. Another learning experi-
               ence. The editor pointed out that since the readers could not go to see the performance
               (it was a one-time event) and in fact not many of them had seen it (about 20-25), I
               should keep it brief. I also had to control my own tendency to get carried away and use
               poetic metaphors to describe the presentation.

               And, as reflected in her journal, Joan learned that a response letter can be a busi-
          ness opportunity:

               Sent out a letter to a lady [who] had requested literature on a new product one of our
               clients has... This letter again showed my naivete. I had assumed | was simply sending
               her a letter. [The supervisor] said no, this was a pitch. It only took me a half an hour to
               write this one!

               Louise, who had become adept at tailoring request letters to the particular inter-
          ests of a donor, gained an understanding of another aspect of the grant application
          process:
                  Because of lack of time, we decided to send the same grant to all [four potential donors]. . .
                  It might be nice to try and come up with a new one, but I must be realistic, the founda-
                  tions all need to read the same information. .. These letters are already very concise. . .
                  There is no room to go on and on explaining in great detail why this particular founda-
                  tion is so wonderfully perfect for supporting [us]. This isn’t that type of grant. And it’s not
                  as if they are all going to get together and compare grants, so why write up a different one
                  for each?

                  As a direct result of action and initiatives, all our interns reported or intimated
           some level of rewards and/or extra responsibility toward the end of their experience.
           Some achieved rewards late in their internships simply because they had to be on the
           job a certain length of time before they were given responsibility. This was true for
           both Betsy and Louise. In her journal, Louise told about handing in the final draft of
           her proposal and “feeling pretty good about it”:
                  I worked long and hard on it, and feel confident about [the] outcome—but, unfortunately,
                  I don’t have the final say. I sat there trying to look busy while my supervisor read my 13-
                  page draft. I have to admit I was pretty nervous. She was making a few marks on it here
                  and there. She looked up and smiled and said, “Excellent job. I’ll be proud to use this pro-
                  posal again in the future.” I’m sure ! was just beaming.
                                Anson, Forsberg     * Moving Beyond the Academic Community        403


In a similar vein, Betsy reported how her supervisor rewarded her with added respon-
sibility as the internship came to a close:
    She wants me to do some research on the stories used for next season. . . [She] is trusting
    me to do a lot on my own. I’m not just doing grunt work—it’s a lot of thinking and writ-
     ing On my own.

     We have no data on whether Jim achieved reward from his internship. In an in-
terview, he reported that a potential opportunity presented itself just before the
course ended:
    The new coordinator said now once the regular spring publicity is done that her husband
    [who] works video. .. would like me to work on a TV script. Which is kind of neat, I
    think.

Rachel did not finish her major writing project before the end of the course, but she
was aware of its importance and potential:
    The promotional writing that I’m doing will have an impact, hopefully positive, on the
    future of this company. That is no small responsibility.
And Paula reported in her journal that she experienced an early success:
    Just found out my band director story was picked up by one of the other papers and
    printed on the front page. WHOOPEE!

Joan, however, seemed to realize only toward the end of the course, as she approached
resolution, that the experiences she had had throughout her internship were reward-
ing and rare opportunities. As she wrote in her journal:

    I’ve been wondering if | would be able to have this diversity if 1were working for another
    agency. I think not. I don’t know of many places that would allow a novice to meet with
    their major clients; do marketing; work on an international seminar; and put together a
    seminar.

    The interns we studied all seemed to reach, by virtue of their learning and the re-
wards it afforded, a final stage in the cycle which we have called resolution—the inte-
gration of self and role as the writer becomes more comfortable within the context
and resolves previous conflicts to gain a more balanced view of the experience. At
this point, the writers seemed able to assess and internalize the gains that they had
made and to value them as growth and learning. We find it especially interesting,
however, that resolution is dependent on earlier frustration, suggesting that instead of
finding ways to avoid the difficulties inherent in learning, a writer does well to learn
how to embrace these difficulties and make them productive (see Anson, 1986).
    At the end of the quarter, Joan found herself resolving both the ambivalence she
felt toward her supervisor and the anxiety that had given her difficulty with her writ-
ing. A late journal entry, for example, showed a remarkably positive attitude toward
her supervisor which seems linked to a fuller understanding of the supervisor's re-
sponsibilities:

    After the presentation was over, | realized why | like working for [this supervisor] so
    much. She is a good businesswoman and knows how to sell. | may disagree with the
404   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               amount of time she spends on research, but she usually is right in the end... 1 can now
               write much faster and without a crutch. I’ve decided that my main problem is needing ap-
               proval. Now I write as if there will be no one to edit it. The final copy seems to come out
               much better.

           Louise’s journal also shows how she came to a relativistic view of the work on which
           she had expended so many hours:
               Now I can only hope that the foundations and companies I have contacted will respond
               positively. I would like to know that somebody out there is donating money in response to
               a grant that I have done. If not, that’s life, and I’ll try again another time. The experience
               was beneficial and rewarding.

           And Paula made personal gains, as reflected in an interview:
               ] think I’ve grown a lot in my self-confidence in my own writing ability. I’ve received a lot
               of compliments and have people looking for my stories, and that’s really good strokes for
               the ego. I’ve realized that I probably have a facility that I assumed everybody else had and
               [that] may be not be the case. And | really want to improve my writing skills as a result.

           Jim, perhaps the most anguished of the interns, found himself better equipped for his
           future career. As he told us during an interview:
               Now. . . I’d be able to work publicly for a place but also I’d be able to work independently
               in an office, which | think is important. Because on my other jobs I’ve worked in offices
               before, but never that independently.

           Finally, we were surprised at how easily Rachel resolved the major conflict in her in-
           ternship—the lack of time to write in the midst of all her office duties—and came to
           a very salient statement about working in context. In her final summary, she wrote:

               I said once in class that I didn’t think | was learning much, but in the construction of this
               paper I have been forced to think differently about that statement. ..1 was thinking
               about. . . a classroom setting. What | realize now is that I’ve been learning through expe-
               rience and the actual doing, and gradually transforming my thoughts in ways that will
               complement the company. | haven’t sat down with a textbook on how to operate within a
               professional setting and then taken a test on the subject. I’ve been gradually assimilating
               without really realizing it. There are many things that you think you don’t know until you
               are forced to explain them.



           REFLECTIONS AND PROSPECTS
           Reviewing the beginning of her internship for her final project, Rachel wrote (as was
           cited earlier) that ‘no one could remember where the rulebook went”; summarizing
           the conclusion of her internship, she realized that she had indeed learned much,
           without always being consciously aware of it.
               In the time that transpired between these two statements, Rachel had found the
           rulebook through (a) trial and error, (b) learning to read the context in which she
           was writing, and (c) both unconscious and conscious assimilation. She too had come
           to know something of what the other people in the office knew—the tacit beliefs and
                               Anson, Forsberg    " Moving Beyond the Academic Community     405


conventions of the workplace. What her supervisors had was unspoken knowledge—
something established that they no longer were aware of thinking about.
      At the same time, Rachel also began to realize that the rulebook itself was not a
rulebook at all, in the conventional sense, but was a strategic way of understanding
and working in a continually evolving context. By watching the interns struggle with
this concept, we began to see that there is no such thing as a “context” as a static en-
tity, that is, a place or function whose rules are entirely visible and can be learned or
known independently of the effect that the outsider creates by entering it.
Communicative contexts, in other words, are subject to the Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle; our interns were not simply “filtering” a static context through their own
development and consciousness, but in fact were writing on it and influencing its de-
velopment.
    Once we included this broader concept of transition in our study, we soon real-
ized that at the center of the phenomena we were observing was an ongoing process
of adapting to a social setting, involving not only the idiosyncratic textual features of
a discourse community but a shifting array of political, managerial, and social influ-
ences as well. Just as our interns were developing their own new knowledge, so were
they affecting the behaviors of those with whom they worked—particularly in the
way their immediate supervisors perceived and communicated with them. The en-
trance of a novice member into the workplace tests the context, and the necessary in-
teraction produces changes for all participants. At one point, Jim said that he was
learning as much about offices as writing; we would suggest that the two types of
knowledge are inseparable, and that their effects are mutual.
     Our study also suggests that the writer must first become a “reader” of a context be-
fore he or she can be “literate” within it. This literacy does not seem restricted to mu-
tual knowledge of some intellectual domain (cf. Hirsch, 1987) but includes highly situ-
ational knowledge that can be gained only from participating in the context, which
itself is in a constant state of change. Although we did not measure it, we believe that,
to some degree, the length of time it takes for such literacy to develop is dependent on
the individual’s ability for social adaptation. Recent research on the relationship be-
tween social cognition and writing ability has focused mainly on static, school-centered
tasks (Beach & Anson, 1988; see Bonk, 1990, and Rubin, 1984, for reviews). In the
present study, the greater the individual’s ability to interpret the constituent elements
of the environment in a positive, self-determining way, the more quickly the individual
achieved resolution, both within him or herself and within the workplace. And with
resolution came greater comfort and competence with writing tasks.
      This is not to say, however, that the ability to achieve success in a new writing
context rests solely with the writer. On the contrary, the context is a deeply enabling
or disabling factor in the process. The small sample makes it difficult to draw definite
conclusions; but it is revealing that, of our interns, the two (Louise and Joan) who
had supervisors willing to act as mentors, even to a small degree, made easier adjust-
ments than did interns who had less communicative supervisors. Jim, who worked
witha very negative supervisor, in an office undergoing great change, fared worst of
all. And while our accounts might locate the nexus of adaptation on the interaction
between an employee and an immediate supervisor, some jobs do not provide for such
a relationship. Betsy, for example, worked as an assistant to everyone in the theater
administrative office. She made a relatively easy adjustment only because the entire
406   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



          staff was cooperative and communicative. Clearly, this complex relationship among
          writing, social adaptation, and the climate or culture of the community stands at the
          center of writers’ experiences as they plan, compose, revise, and assess their texts.
               In looking at the experiences related by our interns, we also tried to determine
          whether the degree to which the internships were related to the interns’ career goals
          played any part in the nature or quality of their transition as writers. The work of
           William Perry (1970), for example, has suggested that students who reach an ad-
          vanced stage of intellectual “commitment” might be shared. And recent studies of
          changes in students’ intellectual growth during and following internship and other
          field-learning experiences would seem to support such a hypothesis (see Hursch &
          Borzak, 1979).
               But we found no strong evidence of such a relationship. Betsy, Joan, and Jim were
          pursuing definite career choices; Betsy and Joan both had positive experiences, while
          Jim did not. Louise, Paul, and Rachel were all exploring. Louise felt that she had
          found a good career possibility, Paula was still ambivalent about her writing, and
          Rachel said that she had now eliminated one career possibility. Here again, we must
          look at the interplay between the individual and the workplace. Jim was the least
          skilled writer and worked in an apparently negative environment; Rachel worked in a
          very stressful entrepreneurial office. Paula worked outside an office environment,
          with little interaction. Louise, Betsy, and Joan all showed the greatest ability to inter-
          pret their experiences positively and to set goals and pursue them.
               Our recognition of the interplays between the intern and the culture of the dis-
          course community caused us to regret not having conducted a wider ethnography of
          one or two of the organizations where our subjects were working. Although we ob-
          tained clear glimpses of these settings through texts that our interns brought to us
           (both their own and others’), most of our information came to us already interpreted
           by our subjects. The relationship between what new employees see in their contexts
           and what might be seen by an ethnographer could further refine the stages of transi-
           tion that we have documented.
                It is also clear that our interns’ experiences were somewhat different from what
           might be normally expected in moving from an academic community into a profes-
           sional working situation. First, the internship course itself provided the students a
           unique opportunity to analyze and share their experiences with a group of sympa-
           thetic peers under the leadership of their teacher, an expert in business writing.
           Under normal circumstances, newly-hired employees are locked in single combat
           with their own composing difficulties, without a group of peers to either help out or
           lend support. Second, interns are usually perceived differently from “new hires’—the
           position is temporary, with fewer risks and professional demands than a permanent
           job—and this fact may change the intern’s sense of status or security, relationship to
           superiors, desire to learn about the writing context, and development of long- and
           short-range goals. The process of bringing to the surface our students’ otherwise tac-
           itly developing knowledge and strategies, of helping them to gain a more conscious
           understanding of the phenomena that we (and they) were studying, no doubt affected
           their transitions as writers.
                Finally, it is worth noting that all of these questions focus on the way in which
           one learns to write in a new professional setting. While the bulk of research on
                                Anson, Forsberg    " Moving Beyond the Academic Community      407


nonacademic writing is illuminating and extremely useful pedagogically, it has set out
to understand writing in professional contexts through already proficient (if not ex-
pert) writers. It therefore explores only in a secondary way what it means to become
such a writer. We know what sorts of knowledge professional writers have and what
sorts of strategies they use, but much less is known about how these are acquired.
Further research must begin to bridge the gap between academic and nonacademic
writing by taking a more developmental perspective toward the factors that con-
tribute to learning to write in professional settings (Anson, 1988). Sensitivity to is-
sues of gender and class could also explore some of the cultural dimensions in adapt-
ing to a new professional context (it is interesting to note, for example, that the one
male in our study had the most difficulty integrating himself into a new community).
     Without further research validating and refining the stages of adaptation that we
have documented, we hesitate to offer specific pedagogical implications from our
study. However, the line of research we have presented begs for further development
with an eye to improving our current teaching methods, both in business and in edu-
cation. We do not know, for example, whether the structure of the internship and the
concurrent course, with their definite starting and ending points, crystallized the
stages and gave impetus to the individuals’ achieving some form of closure before sep-
arating from the experience. Before developing ways for helping young writers to
foresee an experience based on our scheme, we would want to know whether the
stages would be extended or recur over a longer period of time. For example, given
that the act of writing occurs within a dynamic context of ongoing change, can we
expect this cycle of transition to recur throughout the course of an individual’s work
experience? Would it do so with less intensity or conscious awareness as the individ-
ual becomes more experienced? Over a longer work span, in what form (and with
what results) does a writer set up new expectations, take initiative, undergo conflict
and frustration, complete new projects, and receive rewards and responsibility?
Would the entrance of new supervisors, new co-workers and new circumstances in
the workplace—expansion, cut-backs, and layoffs—tresult in new frustration or con-
flict that then would require the need for new adaptation toward resolution?
      In searching for answers to these questions, we may well discover some useful
ways in which to extend our current pedagogy of professional writing beyond its pri-
marily textual or “composing process” orientation and into the realms of territoriality,
initiation and membership, ritual, and dialect—concepts that would seem to lie at
the heart of writing as cultural adaptation.

References
    Anderson, PB. (1985). What survey research tells us about writing at work. In O.
       Odell & D.L. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in nonacademic settings (pp. 3-83). New
       York: Guilford.
    Anson, C.M. (1986). Reading, writing, and intention. Reader, 16, 20-35.
    Anson, C.M. (1987). The classroom and the “real world” as contexts. Journal of the
     " Midwest Modern Language Association, 20, 1-16.
    Anson, C.M. (1988). Toward a multidimensional model of writing in the academic
       disciplines. In D.A. Jolliffe (Ed.), Advances in writing research: Vol. 2. Writing in
       academic disciplines (pp. 1-33). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
408   Chapter 8 =» Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric


               Bazerman, C. (1979). Written language communities: Writing in the context of reading.
                  Unpublished manuscript. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 232
                  159).
               Bazerman, C. (1981). What written knowledge does: Three examples of academic
                  discourse. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 11, 361-367.
               Beach, R., & Anson, C.M. (1988). The pragmatics of memo writing: Developmental
                  differences in the use of rhetorical strategies. Written Communication, 4, 157-183.
               Beach, R., & Bridwell, L.S. (Eds.). (1986). New directions in composition research. New
                  York: Guilford.
               Bizzell, P. (1982). Cognition, convention,     and certainty: What we need to know
                   about writing. Pre/Text, 3, 213-243.
               Bonk, C.J. (1990). A synthesis of social cognition and writing research. Written
                  Communication, 7(1), 136-163.
               Brandt, D. (1986). Toward an understanding of context in composition. Written
                  Communication, 3, 139-157.
               Britton, J., Burgess, T., Martin, N., McLeod, A., & Rosen, H. (1972). The development
                  of writing abilities (11-18). London: Macmillan.
               Brown, R.L., Jr., & Herndl, C. (1986). An ethnographic study of corporate writing:
                  Job status as reflected in written text. In B. Couture (Ed.), Functional approaches to
                  writing: Research perspectives (pp. 11-28). New York: Ablex.
               Colomb, G., & Williams, J.M. (1985). Perceiving structure in professional prose: A
                  multiply determined experience. In L. Odell & D.L. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in
                  nonacademic settings (pp. 87-128). New York: Guilford.
               Cooper, M.M. (1986). The ecology of writing. College English, 48, 364-375.
               Cooper, M.M., & Holzman,        M. (1989). Writing as social action. Portsmouth,    NH:
                  Heinemann.
               Doheny-Farina, S. (1983). Writing in an emerging organization: An ethnographic
                  study. Written Communication, 3, 158-185.
               Fahnestock, J. (1986). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific facts.
                  Written Communication, 3, 275-296.
               Faigley, L. (1985). Nonacademic writing. The social perspective. In L. Odell & D.
                   Goswami (Eds.), Writing in nonacademic settings (pp. 231-280). New York: Guilford.
               Faigley, L., Cherry, R.D., Jolliffe, D.A., & Skinner, A.M. (1985). Assessing writers’
                  knowledge and processes of composing. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
               Faigley, L., & Hanson, K. (1985). Learning to write in the social sciences. College
                  Composition and Communication, 36, 140-150.
               Florio, S., & Clark, C.M. (1982). The functions of writing in an elementary class-
                  room. Research in the Teaching of English, 16, 115-130.
               Forsberg, L.L. (1987). Who’s out there, anyway? Bringing awareness of multiple audi-
                  ences into the business writing class. Jowa State Journal of Business and Technical
                  Communication, 1, 45-69.
               Freed, R.C., & Broadhead, G.J. (1987). Discourse communities, sacred texts, and in-
                  stitutional norms. College Composition and Communication, 38, 154-165.
               Gould, J.D. (1980). Experiments on composing letters. In L.W. Gregg & E.R.
                  Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 97-128). Hillsdale, NJ:
                  Lawrence Erlbaum.
                            Anson, Forsberg     = Moving Beyond the Academic Community       409


Green, J.L., & Wallat, C. (Eds.). (1981). Ethnography and language in educational set-
   tings. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Harrison, T.M. (1987). Frameworks for the study of writing in organizational con-
   texts. Written Communication, 9, 3-24.
Herrington, A. (1985). Writing in academic settings: A study of the context of writ-
   ing in two college chemical engineering courses. Research in the Teaching of English,
   19, 331-362.
Hirsch, E.D., Jr. (1987). Cultural literacy: What every American needs to know. Boston:
   Houghton Mifflin.
Hursch, B., & Borzak, L. (1979). Toward cognitive development through field stud-
   ies. Journal of Higher Education, 50, 63-78.
Knoblauch, C.H. (1979). Intentionality in the writing process: A case study. College
   Composition and Communication, 31, 153-159.
McCarthy, L.P. (1987). A stranger in strange lands: A college student writing across
   the curriculum. Research in the Teaching of English, 21, 233-265.
Miller, C.R., & Selzer, J. (1985). Special topics of argument in engineering reports. In
    L. Odell & D. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in nonacademic settings (pp. 309-342). New
   York: Guilford.
Odell, L. (1985). Beyond the test: Relations between writing and social context. In
   L. Odell & D. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in nonacademic settings (pp. 249-280). New
   York: Guilford.
Odell, L., & Goswami, D. (1982). Writing in a nonacademic setting. Research in the
   Teaching of English, 16, 201-223.
Odell, L., & Goswami, D. (1984). Writing in nonacademic settings. In R. Beach &
   L.S. Bridwell (Eds.), New directions in composition research (pp. 233-258). New
   York: Guilford.
Odell, L. Goswami, D., & Herrington, A. (1983). The discourse-based interview: A
   procedure for exploring the tacit knowledge of writers in nonacademic settings. In
   P. Mosenthal, L. Tamor, & S.A. Walmsley (Eds.), Research on writing: Principles and
   methods (pp. 220-235). New York: Longman.
Odell, L., Goswami, D., & Quick, D. (1983). Writing outside the English composi-
   tion class. In R.W. Bailey & R.M. Fosheim (Eds.), Literacy for life (pp. 175-194).
   New York: MLA.
Paradis, J., Dobrin, D., & Miller, R. (1985). Writing at Exxon ITD: Notes on the
    writing environment of an R&D organization. In L. Odell & D. Goswami (Eds.),
    Writing in nonacademic settings, (pp. 281-308). New York: Guilford.
Perry, W.G., Jr. (1970). Forms of intellectual development in the college years: A scheme.
    New York: Holt, Rinehart @ Winston.
Piazza, C.L. (1987). Identifying context variables in research on writing: A review
    and suggested directions. Written Communications, 9, 107-138.
Porter, J.E. (1986). Intertextuality and the discourse community. Rhetoric Review, 5,
   34-47.
Rubin, D.L. (1984). Social cognition and written communication.                 Written
 ~ Communication, 1, 211-245.
Secor, M., & Fahnestock, J. (1982). The rhetoric of literary argument. Paper presented
   at the Penn State Conference on Rhetoric and Composition, University Park.
410   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               Selzer, J. (1983). The composing process of an engineer. College Composition and
                   Communication, 34, 178-187.
               Teich, N. (1987). Transfer of writing skills: Implications of the theory of lateral and
                  vertical transfer. Written Communication, 9, 193-208.
               Tomlinson, B. (1984). Talking about the composing process: The limitations of retro-
                  spective accounts. Written Communications,       1, 429-445.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Identify and briefly describe two or three of the main challenges faced by Anson and
                Forsberg’s subjects. Then, locate some of the articles you have read in previous chapters
                that help professional writers prepare for these challenges. Explain how these articles
                help professional writers, especially ones entering new positions, understand and deal
                with the challenges you have chosen to discuss.
             2.Anson and Forsberg argue that professional writers must first become readers.
                Summarize what they argue writers must read and why it is important to complete these
                readings. Then, evaluate the reading process of one of their subjects, as far as you can
                glean from the details they give you in the article.
             3. If you were faced with Rachel's situation as an intern, where she was asked to make a
                brochure but given little to no instructions or guidance, what would you do? Refer to pre-
                vious articles to discuss what you would need to know and do, why you would need to
                know and do these things, and how you could find what you would need to know and
                get done what you would need to do.
             4. Respond to the following claim: Learning how to write is less about learning how to pro-
                duce a certain kind of thing than it is learning how to analyze, strategize for, and respond
                to writing situations. Support your response with examples, both personal and drawn
                from the Anson and Forsberg article.




              FOCUSING ON KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. macro-level writing processes
              2. micro-level writing processes
              3. low-level context
              4. mid-level context
              5. high-level context
              6. social cognition
              7. rhetorical development
                                                                                    MacKinnon         * Becoming a Rhetor     411



     BECOMING A RHETOR: DEVELOPING WRITING
     ABILITY IN A MATuRE, WRITING-INTENSIVE
     ORGANIZATION
     JAMIE MacKINNON

 Wr             a good deal of research has been done on the development of writing abil-
          ity in schoolchildren (e.g., Bereiter, 1980; Britton, Burgess, Martin, & Rosen,
 1975), little is known about the development of writing ability in educated, working
 adults. Research indicates that on-the-job writers believe that they do develop signif-
 icantly through on-the-job writing experience (Bataille, 1982; Brown, 1988) and
 that this experience is valued more highly than other factors such as writing courses
 or training in school (Paradis, Dobrin, & Bower, 1984). The nature of this develop-
 ment, however, has not been closely examined.
      Indeed, research on the what, the how, and the why of development of on-the-
job writing ability has hardly begun. As a result, we have an incomplete picture of
writing development, one that implies that development is primarily school-based
 and thus conceived as “whatever the schools make it to be” (Bereiter, 1980, p. 88).
The result is also a limited perspective on nonacademic writing, one that lacks an un-
derstanding of the intellectual abilities that nonacademic writing “demands and fos-
 ters” (Scribner & Cole, 1981, p. 76).
       While interest has grown recently in writing as a “local” phenomenon, with con-
text-dependent aims and characteristics (e.g., Bazerman, 1988), we are still far from
understanding the relationship between the development of writing ability and the
contexts in which it occurs. Britton was perhaps one of the first empirical researchers
to underline the importance of context to development, especially to the significant
audience—and function-related aspects of development (Britton et. Al., 1975). And
Britton has warned repeatedly against “mistakenly treat[ing] writing as a single kind
of ability, regardless of the reader for whom it is intended and the purpose it attempts
to serve” (Britton, 1978, p. 13). Of course once the idea of development in context is
accepted, the more difficult and problematic it is to conceive of a satisfactory general
model of development, or even, perhaps, of “rhetorical maturity” (Miller, 1980), ex-
cept in a local and contingent sense.
      These very difficulties, however, point to the kind of theoretical contribution
that might be made by research on the development of writing ability in various
workplaces, especially in university-educated adults. In contrast to children, whose
writing development intertwines with rapid growth in the mechanical and linguistic
abilities needed to produce written text, educated adults who develop on-the-job
writing ability should theoretically develop in a more purely rhetorical fashion, that
is, in. their ability to move the world through written language. And theoretically,

Source: MacKinnon, Jamie, “Becoming a Rhetor: Developing Writing Ability in a Mature, Writing-Intensive Organization.”
Originally published in the Work: Writing in the Workplace: New Research Perspectives edited by Rachel Spilka, pp.   41-55.
© 1993 by the Board of Trustees, Souther Illinois University, reprinted by permission of the publisher.
412   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



          growth in the writing ability of educated adults should be determined largely by the
          specific characteristics and demands of the work context in which it occurs. A better
          understanding of how and why educated adults develop on-the-job writing ability
          would therefore extend development theory by suggesting elements of a theory for
          rhetorical development in context.
               Such an understanding, even a provisional one, should also widen the perspec-
          tive on nonacademic writing in two different ways. First, it would add a dynamic, di-
          achronic dimension to the picture, a dimension that has been largely ignored.
          Writers move the world through writing, but they too move, even as they write.
          Second, if development is shaped by the demands of the context in which it occurs,
          knowledge of this growth should also help us understand some of the determining
          features of various workplaces as discourse communities.
               These issues provided a theoretical context for a naturalistic, longitudinal inves-
           tigation of writing-related change in ten newly employed, highly educated adult
           “knowledge workers.” The investigation was an attempt to discover some early, provi-
           sional answers to two complex questions. First, what writing-related knowledge do
           university graduates acquire in their first one to two years on the job in a writing-in-
           tensive, mature organization? Second, how do they learn what they learn? These
           questions in turn suggested a number of lower-level questions about the role of atti-
           tudes and beliefs in developing on-the-job writing ability, the effect a growing under-
           standing of the socio-organizational context might have on writing, and possible
           changes in the writing process and written products. The investigation was an at-
           tempt to provide a tentative answer to a third, higher-level question: How best to
           characterize writing-related knowledge acquired on-the-job?


           SETTING
           I am a writing instructor at the Bank of Canada, Canada’s central bank. The Bank’s
           major activities include financial and monetary analysis, securities analysis, and
           econometric modeling. These activities are largely enabled by and carried out
           through writing. The Bank could be characterized as “writing-intensive”: Writing is
           one of the most pervasive and important value-adding activities in the organization.
                The Bank of Canada is large, employing hundreds of analysts and economists; it
           is stable and mature, being more than fifty years old; and it is organized into a fairly
           rigid hierarchy. These characteristics help distinguish the Bank as a unique and partly
           self-regulating discourse community. Other aspects of the Bank that are relevant to
           its functioning as a discourse community include the importance of writing to the
           carrying out of virtually all of the Bank’s business functions, and the high regard
           given good writing, especially by members of senior management; a high degree of
           caution and care in decision making; the research orientation and academic back-
           ground of its economists and analysts; and the predominance of “document cycling”
           (Paradis, Dobrin, & Miller, 1985) as a vehicle for “massaging” texts and managing
           the documentation process.
                The writing done by analysts and economists responds to the information needs
           of various senior decision makers in the organization. These information needs are
           not readily apparent to new employees, and senior decision makers are often many
                                                            MacKinnon   # Becoming a Rhetor   413

levels removed in the hierarchy from junior employees. New employees typically
write analytic reports dealing with ad hoc issues, as well as regularly scheduled, more
generic text such as “weekly notes”, “updates,” and “monthlies.” Most of this writing
involves research, analysis; and evaluation, and often in the case of the analytic re-
ports, the development of a tightly reasoned argument.
     The size and maturity of the Bank mean that newcomers accommodate and adapt
themselves much more to the organization than in a small or “emergent” organization
(Doheny-Farina, 1986). The strength and singularity of the Bank’s culture are hinted
at when employees speak of the “Bank culture,” the “Bank point of view” on economic
events, and the “Bank style” in writing. The Bank has its own style guide and in-house
editors to review many of its most prestigious and important public documents.


METHOD
To maintain the required level of professional staff, the Bank regularly recruits newly
graduated economists and financial analysts. This study involved investigating
changes in the writing and writing-related knowledge of ten of these newly-arrived
professional employees. The participants were the first ten economists and analysts to
be hired following Bank approval to conduct this research. All of the participants
were recent university graduates; several had masters’ degrees. None of the partici-
pants, save one, perhaps, had ever written much outside of school. All of the partici-
pants, eight men and two women, were under the age of thirty.
      Most of the data came from intensive two-hour interviews. The participants were
interviewed twice. The first interview immediately followed the final draft of their
first major paper (on average, about three months after joining the Bank) after they
had revised on the basis of the final round of feedback. The second interview, ten to
twenty months later, immediately followed the final draft of another major paper.
Following the second interview, in-depth interviews were conducted with six man-
agers (those who consented) of the participants. In addition to supervising the partic-
ipants, these managers act as reviewers in the document-cycling process.
     The interviews with the participants and the managers were document based.
That is, the interviews tool place immediately following the production of a large
document and focused largely on the concrete and discrete experience of writing the
single document at hand. Because of the variation in document types and because of
the effects of managerial intervention in the document cycling process, discourse
analysis was not practicable. The first interview had participants respond to identical,
open-ended questions and dealt with four areas: attitudes and beliefs regarding writ-
ing; knowledge of the social and organizational context of writing; the writing
process; and the written product.
     The second interview asked participants first to describe any possible global
changes of significance in their writing, and then the four areas were probed both
generally and with participant-specific prompts, such as quotations of salient com-
ments made by the participant in the first interview. Participants were asked to refer
to aspects of the document at hand to illustrate statements regarding possible change
since the first interview. The interview concluded by asking participants about differ-
ences between writing at a university and the Bank, advice they would give an in-
414   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric


           coming employee about writing, and whether they thought their writing would con-
           tinue to develop in the following year.
                As preparation for their interviews, the managers were asked to review the first-
           stage and second-stage documents. The first part of this interview involved asking the
          manager about possible changes in the employee’s writing, both generally and in the
          four areas investigated. The second part had the manager react to interesting or
          salient participant statements regarding change from the participant’s second-stage
          interview. Immediately following the interview, the manager was asked to fill in a re-
          action sheet that posited possible writing-related changes in the employee. The man-
          ager checked changes that were seen as true and then ranked the changes in terms of
          significance.
               In general, the methodology was naturalistic and qualitative in orientation and
          both emic and etic in data production. The largely retrospective data from the partic-
          ipants’ reports were triangulated through reference to the documents (by the partici-
          pant, manager, and researcher), through comparing the managers’ general remarks
          with the participants’, and through having the managers comment specifically on
          some of the participants’ salient statements. The personal and collaborative nature of
          the writer-manager relationship meant that more “process-based” investigative meth-
          ods would have been seen as intrusive.

           FINDINGS
           All participants appeared to acquire a wealth of writing-related knowledge over the
           ten to twenty month research time frame. It should be noted that the participants
           spent a good deal of time writing in this period. Seven of the participants reported
           spending 60% or more of their work time writing; one spent about 50%, one about
           40%, and another about 35%. Many of the document types written over the research
           period were new to the participants.
                The participants, managers, and researcher tended to have similar and corrobo-
           rating perceptions regarding changes in the participants’ writing and writing-related
           knowledge. The writers developed in the four areas examined, although many
           changes or developments did not fit neatly into a single area. Many of the findings
           show a complex, dynamic relationship between learning more about (and through)
           writing and learning more about the place of work, its employees, its culture and busi-
           ness functions, and the individual’s job. !
                Understanding of the social and organizational context. A critical aspect of the par-
           ticipants’ development appeared to be learning a good deal about the social and orga-
           nizational context in which they wrote: the business functions performed by their de-
           partments, the jobs performed by their readers (and thus their readers’ needs for
           information), and the values and beliefs implicit in the organization’s activities (more
           than one participant mentioned the “Bank view of the world”).
                Most participants said that increased knowledge of the social and organizational
           context had significant effects on their writing. “Understanding the power structure. . .
           knowing. . . my readers personally and how they fit into the workflow. . . helps me know
           how to convince my readers,” said one participant. Another said, “You have to know
           what people know and don’t know and that takes time.” One participant who, accord-
                                                            MacKinnon    ® Becoming a Rhetor   415


ing to his manager, had gained in several important ways as a writer over the course of
his first year and a half, did not “put much value on knowing the organizational con-
text” in the second interview. His manager, however, believed that he had acquired a
good deal of knowledge in this area and thought this knowledge critical to his improved
writing. The manager cited better understanding of the department's business func-
tions, the participant's audience, and the participant’s own job requirements as being
the most important factors in helping the participant to write more useful papers. All
managers interviewed confirmed the importance of this contextual knowledge for writ-
ers: “You want to understand what your reader is going to be doing with the informa-
tion you’re giving him in order to give it to him in a useful way,” said one.
     Another manager, in commenting on how useful it was for a writer to “know
who’s deciding what, and who needs what information” noted that in a large, hierar-
chic organization, this learning took time, typically more than a year. On the other
hand, one participant noted that at the higher levels of a university, “you can go a
long time without seeing your professor” while “here you see your boss every day.”
     In the first interview, most participants were confident in their knowledge of the
audience and the underlying purpose of the document just written. Interestingly, ten
to twenty months later, most participants looked back on these earlier certainties
with disbelief. “I definitely wasn’t clear [when | started working here] about the read-
ership and how readers used the documents. . Sometimes you’re wrong,” was one
representative comment. All managers confirmed the participants’ beliefs that they
had developed a much better sense of audience and purpose over the research period;
most managers also predicted that this knowledge would continue to grow.
     Another significant, though largely unconscious, aspect of the writers’ develop-
ment was in how they learned to use and manipulate a social/organizational
process—document cycling and complex feedback—in order to help them produce
satisfactory documents. As they learned how to deal with feedback and documents
cycling, which all participants found enormously frustrating at times, they were also
learning more about their readers as individuals as well as their information needs,
more about Bank discourse conventions, and more about the business functions en-
abled by or related to the documents they were writing. This increased acuity ap-
peared to prompt consequent changes in the “macro” aspects of their writing
processes, as suggested below.
     The writing process. The participants reported more change in their writing
process than the researcher had expected. Eight of the ten participants volunteered
in the unguided, global part of the second interview that there had been major
changes in their writing processes. These changes tended to be “high-level” or
“macro” in nature, reflecting an accommodation to the larger dynamics of organiza-
tional life as well as an improved understanding of audiences, purposes, and writing-
related business functions.
     The following developments appeared to be the most common. In the second in-
terview, the participants reported being more apt to:

    ® initiate ad hoc documents;                                              |
    ° clarify assigned papers orally to a greater degree when they were assigned and
      later while planning;
416   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               ¢ be clearer before starting to draft about the “story” they would write, a story
                 that economic or financial numbers would support;
               @ discuss writing with colleagues, especially in the early stages of writing;
               e keep their readers in mind as they wrote (“On the last paper | went through so
                 many drafting changes as a result of suggestions,” said one participant, “that I
                 began to think that there must be as easier way of making the paper acceptable
                 to the reader earlier in the process. So, ‘Would he [the manager] consider this
                 acceptable’ became my standard, my benchmark.”);
               * react to feedback effectively. Usually this meant better affective reaction as
                 well as better instrumental strategies for using feedback. Virtually all of the
                 participants felt less personally threatened and less depressed about feed-
                 back as time wore on: “A million red marks doesn’t mean you aren’t a good
                 writer,” said one participant. By the second interview, participants tended to
                 take a more active role in the feedback sessions, understand more of the
                 feedback, and revise on the basis of this understanding more effectively.
                 Some participants had started asking colleagues for feedback. Participants
                 said that “learning to use feedback” had been critical in making gains in
                 writing; they also said that “feedback was the main [vehicle] for learning”
                 about the Bank and its activities, readers’ needs, and standards and expecta-
                 tions for documents.

                Several participants obtained their own microcomputers during the study period.
           While the participants did not attribute significant changes in process or product to
           the use of word processing, more than one participant commented on increased speed
           and on not having to wait while a draft was tied up with a secretary.
                Some participants reported an increase in efficiency and automatization in writ-
           ing short, formulaic document types.
                The written product. The participants’ written products changed considerably over
           the research period to match more closely busy readers’ narrow needs for information
           and analysis. Documents tended to be more focused, more visibly and hierarchically
           structured, more analytic, and less descriptive. Following are some representative
           comments from managers about changes in the participants’ written products. The
           managers’ interventions have a large effect on each draft; these comments therefore
           refer to changes in first or early drafts.

                 “An improvement in making sure he’s addressing the right audience.”
                 “Doesn’t overburden the readers with details so much.”
                 “He [knows] the need to get a story out.”
                 “The structure and the purpose [are more] obvious [now].”
                 “The content improved... After a year he knew... what information would
                 help his readers.”
               e “An improvement in first drafts. . . [Better at] getting at the bottom line.”

                Attitudes and beliefs about writing. The participants’ attitudes and beliefs about
           writing changed in various ways. Belief in the possibility of development was one im-
           portant change. Few participants, when first interviewed, believed they would de-
           velop significantly as writers in their first year or two at the Bank. When asked about
           possible changes in their writing over the coming year, a few participants predicted
                                                             MacKinnon   * Becoming a Rhetor   417

no change (“Quite frankly, [I have] the same writing skills I’ve had since grade
school,” said one); several predicted possible change in rather narrow aspects of writ-
ing such as “better terminology” or “improved style”; a few were open to the idea that
there would be broad change but had trouble making concrete the abstraction “some-
thing will change in relation to changing readerships.”
     By the second interview, ten to twenty months later, eight of the ten participants
believed they had developed significantly as writers. In one revealing comment, a
participant said: “Before I started. ..1 would have definitely said that my writing
wouldn’t and needn’t change all that much. But there have been significant changes
and there need to be more changes. . . . I see there is a lot of learning to be done and
a lot of improvement to be made. . . | guess I was being conceited.” While few partic-
ipants predicted they would develop as writers when they were new employees, in the
second-stage interviews, most predicted further development.
     Self-confidence in writing ability increased generally among the participants, al-
though earlier self-confidence was seen later as unjustified, too “naive” or “too high.”
More than one manager made explicit reference to the relationship between attitude
and writing development. One said, “Because he sees it {learning yet to be done and
improvement yet to be made] he’s making progress and he’ll continue to make
progress. It’s the fellow who comes in saying, ‘Hey, look. I did very well in English in
university and I write poetry. You can’t teach me: What are you, some bureaucrat?”
Those guys don’t do so well.”
     Participants’ notions about the functions of writing broadened considerably. For
many participants, this was reflected in a change from viewing the major function of
writing as “to inform people about events and ideas” to the more dialogic sense of get-
ting “reaction to ideas in hope of producing more research.” Some participants devel-
oped a deeper understanding of the epistemic possibilities of writing as well. One par-
ticipant said in her first interview that the role of writing was “to let other people
know what you were doing and to get comments on your research.” Eighteen months
later, she added these three functions: “to answer questions” (analytic function); “to
help people who come after us” (archival function); and “to clarify points of uncer-
tainty. . . for ourselves” (exploratory or learning function). Significantly, most of the
participants developed a powerful understanding over the research period that their
writing needed to address the concrete information needs of their audience and not
simply express what they, the writers, knew on a given topic.
     Interestingly, many of the participants came to appreciate the “local” nature of
writing in the Bank, and perhaps that “good” writing is not a fully generalizable no-
tion: “If you don’t know the culture, if you don’t know the people you’re working
with, then you don’t know your ‘clients,” said one participant. “It’s a marketing strat-
egy: if you don’t know your readers, then your paper is not marketable. . . You have to
write taking into account the environment in which you are working. This is def-
nitely a change in the last year... You have to adapt to new environments and
change your behavior.”
     How the participants learned. The developments outlined above appeared to be trig-
gered by a variety of experiences, but two elements seemed critical: the new demands
placed upon the participants as writers, and the feedback they received on their writ-
ing. The learning appeared to occur through various activities and media: through
writing itself; through thinking about feedback, especially substantive, questioning
418   Chapter 8 #® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



           feedback (from reviewers primarily, but also from colleagues, both in writing and
           orally); through reading, talking, listening, and observing; through development sub-
           ject-matter expertise; and through being directed, admonished, questioned, and en-
           couraged as an employee. All participants emphasized the importance of feedback for
           their development as writers. The document cycling process appeared to be a vehicle
           for building consensus and sharing and making knowledge, as well as for “massaging”
           texts. Most participants emphasized the importance of learning more about their read-
           ers, both personally and as consumers of specific information to perform specific busi-
           ness functions. Several managers stressed the importance of good listening and inter-
           personal skills to writing development. One manager said “she had a very good
           network of peers with whom she could talk and learn a lot that way. I think that’s per-
           haps the major route through which people learn about this organization.” Two man-
           agers mentioned “shyness,” being “passive,” and not being “challenging” in the feed-
           back sessions as factors that would limit an employee’s development of writing ability.
                 The participants’ consciousness of the learning varied. A few participants ap-
           peared to develop much more than they were aware, perhaps because they had nar-
           row, restricting notions of the nature and domain of writing. Some managers were
           “quite surprised” to hear that their employees had attributed a great deal of impor-
           tance to the feedback they had received for their development as writers. One of
           these managers was “quite mystified” about how his employee had learned as much as
           he had. Other managers were more aware of their role in this regard.
                 Managers confirmed most of their employees’ quoted comments on aspects of
           their learning. There were no major differences between participants’ and managers’
           perceptions, save that the manager sometimes saw a less “dramatic” change than the
           writer. Interestingly, more than one manager seemed to think of their employees as
           still developing and predicted further rhetorical growth: “This is going to be the next
           stage of his development if he stays here,” said one manager. “He sees himself as
           someone paid to answer questions. Well, you know, as he moves up, he’s going to be
           paid to ask questions.”


           DISCUSSION
           Overall, the writing-related changes were considerable, consequential, and a shock
           for some participants: “It’s like going to China,” said one. For most of the ten partici-
           pants, the complex totality of the writing-related changes they experienced added up
           to a “sea change”: a major shift in their understanding of what writing is and does in
           an organization, a revised understanding of the roles they saw for themselves as writ-
           ing workers and as working writers, and often major changes in various aspects of the
           macro writing process.
                The findings strongly support the idea that educated employees can develop writ-
           ing ability on the job (Brown, 1988) as well as the notion that on-the-job experience
           is the major source of this learning (Paradis, Dobrin, & Bower, 1984), although the
           nature of this experience is complex and begs explanation. Interpreting development
           is always difficult—and usually needs explanation at some level—but perhaps it is
           useful to distinguish here between the developmental process and the developmental
           outcome.
                                                            MacKinnon    ® Becoming a Rhetor   419


     The developmental process appears to have been instigated and informed by the
new rhetorical demands of a new social-organizational context. If expertise in writing
is “not categorical” but relatively domain-specific (Freedman, 1987; Nystrand, 1989)
and cognitive strategies are less “portable” than previously assumed (e.g., Lave, 1985;
Rogoff, 1984), then novel rhetorical demands are likely first to elicit inappropriate
responses and then to spark new cognitive and social response strategies. In the Bank,
the writing process is intertwined with a number of social processes, in particular,
document cycling. It is through engagement in these social processes that newcomers
to the Bank seem to acquire higher-level contextualizing knowledge, which in turn
promotes gains in writing.
     Over the research period, most participants acquired a wealth of knowledge that
allowed them to function more effectively as writers. The most important knowledge
gained, because of its catalytic nature, appeared to be contextualizing knowledge.
Listed (roughly) from high-level, perhaps abstract and distant forms of context to
lower-level, more immediate forms of context, the important elements of this knowl-
edge included:

     * aspects of the Bank as a discourse community that accomplishes specific (and
       at times unique) business functions through the specific discourse practices of a
       specific culture with its own distinct point of view;
     ¢ the information needs of senior, often remote readers;
     @ the business functions enabled through writing and the relationship of written
       texts to various larger institutional “value-adding” processes;
     ¢ the forms of argument and informal reasoning conventional to, and found per-
       suasive in, the Bank;
     ¢ the participant’s role as an employee and writer in the larger, ambient, busi-
       ness-function processes;
     e the rationale for and the mechanics of the document cycling process;
     @ the participant’s growing, job-specific professional knowledge.

      As recent university graduates working in their first major jobs, the participants
were writing, perhaps for the first time in their lives, to an audience with real needs-
 to-know and in order to make things happen. Instead of writing to display mastery of
knowledge as they had done in school, they were writing, as they came to understand
over time, to promote action and to inform decision making.
      A key to the participants’ development appeared to be a much greater awareness
of, and sensitivity and adaptiveness to, the particular demands placed on writing by
the Bank. Their growing awareness of these unique demands came as a surprise to
some of the participants and appeared to be the precursor to writing more audience-
sensitive text. In other words, the participants were not merely developing on some
abstract continuum of “social decentration.” Rather, some participants seemed to
have come to an explicit understanding, perhaps for the first time in their lives, that
audience counts. Indeed, some participants came to understand that meeting their
readers’ specific needs was the key determinant of success of written communication
in the Bank. This growing realization appeared to precede later gains in audience sen-
sitivity and adaptiveness.
420   Chapter 8 « Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               Researchers have suggested that social cognitive ability—the ability to effec-
           tively represent one’s social environment—may play an important role in the devel-
           opment of writing ability (e.g., Piche & Roen, 1987) and that “social cognition” may
           best be seen as a multidimensional ability that interacts in a complex manner with
           the composing process (Rubin, 1984b). These two notions cast light on the nature of
           a significant part of the participants’ development: that of audience sensitivity and
           adaptiveness. Development occurred as the writers grew to understand some of the
           complexities and demands of the social structure in which they were writing.
                Most of the participants contrasted their on-the-job writing with university writ-
           ing by referring to the specificities of audience requirements in the Bank. It is tempt-
           ing to speculate that in academic, a gradual, perhaps instrumentally motivated in-
           crease in “decentration” occurs, while initiation into an adult knowledge-working
           community might provoke a more sudden increase in social cognition, integratively
           as well as instrumentally motivated. Perhaps one needs to write to real, variegated au-
           diences with real and divergent information needs to develop one’s social cognition.
                While social cognition and the demands of a new context account in part for the
           developmental process, a rhetorical perspective can help characterize the outcome of
           the participants’ development. The participants were developing not only as writers,
           but also as members of a community they were still struggling to understand. In ac-
           cepting and initiating writing assignments, submitting drafts at various stages of devel-
           opment to their reviewers, voluntarily seeking formal or informal feedback from col-
           leagues, testing assumptions about their authority to make interpretive claims,
           responding in various fashions to feedback, and a plethora of other actions, the partic-
           ipants were assuming and adjusting writing-related roles for themselves and learning
           and conceptualizing the writing-related roles of others. The wideranging, role-related,
           and epistemic character of the writing-related changes, viewed as a totality, suggests
           that at least some participants experienced significant rhetorical development.
                 That is, over the research period, the participants enhanced their ability to en-
           gage the work community and carry out various tasks through discourse. As
           McCloskey (1985) and others have pointed out, writing in economics is highly
           thetorical. In the Bank, most writing is analytic and argues a case. Writers pose and
           defend contestable ideas; they analyze and evaluate other people’s ideas, all within an
           institutional forum. Senior managers have a pejorative term to describe merely de-
           scriptive writing: “elevator economics” (for example, housing starts are up; productiv-
           ity is down). Young analysts and economists are often told that senior readers want
           analysis, evaluation, arguments, and “stories,” but this must mystify the new employ-
           ees at times. The making of persuasive stories in a community requires an under-
           standing of the community’s shared assumptions, beliefs, and values, as well as the
           forms of argument seen as legitimate in that community.
                 The participants in this study started to develop this knowledge by jumping into
           the fray, by joining the conversation, by making their own arguments. When their ar-
           guments failed to persuade, they knew so immediately, concretely and consequen-
           tially. When their arguments succeeded, it meant that they had succeeded in under-
           standing the rhetorical dynamics of the Bank and the demands of their own
           thetorical situation.
                 The growth of the economist/analyst as a writer can be viewed as the apprentice-
           ship of a rhetor. The participants developed an effective, though largély tacit, under-
                                                            MacKinnon   = Becoming a Rhetor   421

standing of the organization as a rhetorical domain. In acting rhetorically—in speak-
ing, writing, talking, and listening—they were discovering what knowledge was so-
cially significant and which forms of reasoned argument readers found persuasive. In
so doing, the participants found a voice and conceptualized and assumed roles for
themselves in a rhetorically bound, rhetorically functioning community. They joined
in making and testing the community’s knowledge and thus engaged more fully in the
community's practices. In becoming rhetors, they became active participants in the
community’s business.



IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY
This study underscores the inadequacy of development theories based on the writing
of children and adolescents in school settings to explain and interpret the develop-
ment of educated adult writers in a work setting. If context is as important as it ap-
pears to be in determining the development of adult working writers, then an ade-
quate general developmental theory may prove elusive. Developing domain-specific
theory may be a more realistic, if more modest, goal.
     Context would appear to be a critical element in any speculative model of
thetorical development of on-the-job writing ability. While theoreticians are starting
to understand just how complex and multidimensional context can be (e.g., Piazza,
1987), it is useful to remember that writers and employees always start with the con-
text at hand. In a large, hierarchic organization, “high-level context” (for example,
the decision making of senior executives) is likely to be unknown and largely invisi-
ble to new employees. And yet in a large organization where knowledge is both the
“raw material” and the goal of writing (cf. Gage, 1984), an understanding of this con-
text will be critical to rhetorical growth. Development may occur as the employee
engages and is engaged by a more immediate “mid-level context,” the local organiza-
tional structure and forms of social interaction. Depending on the individual’s ability
to perceive, manipulate, and interpret that more immediate context, and depending
on the supportive and inhibiting features of that context, the writer will over time
gain a sense of the less immediate, though rhetorically important, high-level context.
That is, developing writer interacts primarily with an immediate context that inter-
mediates information about and from higher-level contexts.
    For on-the-job writing trainers, knowing that important aspects of writing devel-
opment may naturally follow an increased understanding of business functions, audi-
ence, and corporate culture will have implications for, among other things, the tim-
ing of training. In addition, if writers’ managers are as important as they appear in
developing new employees’ writing, training these managers in the effective manage-
ment of writing may be warranted.
     For writing teachers in colleges and universities, one obvious implication of this
research is that they need not expect students to “master” writing before they gradu-
ate. Writing development is likely to continue after students leave school, it would
seem, if their writing situation demands the kind of changes that prompt rhetorical
erowth. For students in professional programs, being told the simple (but perhaps
counterintuitive) fact that their writing will likely develop in important ways “even”
after graduation may be the most important lesson of all.
422   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               This study examined development in newly hired, recently graduated employees
          only, and in just one workplace. Future research on the development of nonacademic
          writing ability might examine a variety of local, situationally specific development
          patterns. Research on highly educated adults shows particular promise and should be
          pursued.
               Just as studies of the development of academic writing ability sometimes tell us
           more about the school system than the children (Bereiter, 1980), the study of the de-
           velopment of nonacademic writing ability is likely to tell us as much about the worlds
           of work as about writing and development. And it will always be difficult for the re-
           searcher to separate learning to write from learning the job. But if we view writing as
           a way of doing work, the study of these twin developmental processes will afford a
           strategic opportunity: the chance to further integrate research on development and
           nonacademic writing with rhetorical theory. Such an integrated approach is likely to
           generate additional elements of a theory for rhetorical development in context.

           Notes
                   1. A summary of the findings of a naturalistic study is problematic in that the method-
               ological and persuasive benefits of “thick description” are absent, and a rather “thin,” de-
               contextualized list of assertions is the apparent result. The findings presented here are the
               synthetic outcome of two earlier, “lower-level” rounds of classification and analysis. First,
               portraits of individual participants’ writing-related changes were sketched. Second, the-
               matically organized, generalizable changes were drawn from these portraits. The findings
               presented here, then, “hide their tracks,” and represent only a few of the most important
               writing-related changes, those that suggest significant development of writing ability.
                   2. See Myers (1980) for a look at how “bounded rationality” and the “self-serving bias
               in the way we perceive ourselves” (p. 49) are powerful forces in shaping self-image.

           DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
             1. Referring to MacKinnon’s findings, develop a set of goals he would suggest you set for
                yourself as an intern or newly employed writer. In addition, develop a plan that would
                help you reach these goals. Your plan should go beyond what you would want to accom-
                plish to how you plan to accomplish it, in general.
             2. Identify the two or three findings made by MacKinnon that most surprise and/or influ-
                ence you. Explain why you find them surprising and/or influential.
             3. Even though the subjects MacKinnon studied wrote a great deal (up to 60% of their work
                time), they could all be identified as “professionals who write” rather than “professional
                writers.” Do you think MacKinnon’s findings would have been different if his subjects had
                been professional writers? If so, explain why you think so and how they would be differ-
                ent. If not, explain why you believe his findings would be similar.




              Focus on the following terms and concepts while you read through this selection.
              Understanding these will not only increase your understanding of the selection that fol-
              lows, but you will find that, because most of these terms or concepts are commonly used
              in professional writing and rhetoric, understanding them helps you get a better sense of
              the field itself.
              1. facilitated performance
                                                            Dias, Freedman,         Medway,      Paré     ® Virtual Realities   423

        2. attenuated authentic participation
        3. legitimate peripheral participation
        4. scaffolding
        5. social motive
        6. writing as epistemic
        7. writing as instrumental

  eae                                                     .
                                                         SSSESHPHHER
                                                                 OC HYEEE EY                ae      *CHeeReRewaves


        ViRTUAL Reatrries: TRANSITIONS }
                                       FROM
        UNIVERSITY TO WoRrKPLA CE WRITING
                                                                   SPSEEVSHOSHDSE   DA              SH   SSORERHHOEZEDY


        PATRICK DIAS, AVIVA FREEDMAN, PETER
        MEDWAY, ANTHONY PARE

 i this chapter we consider contexts for learning that further exemplify the theoreti-
   cal discussion provided in the previous chapter. We have argued that learning is a
 situated and contingent experience, and that school-based simulations of workplace
 writing fail to prepare students for professional writing because they cannot adequately
 replicate the local rhetorical complexity of workplace contexts. By this we do not
 mean to suggest that course-based case studies are a waste of time, but the goals of such
 learning opportunities need to be reexamined, especially as they relate to the develop-
 ment of professional writing ability. We believe that course-based case studies provide
 an essential introduction to the ways of thinking and knowing valued by disciplines
 and encouraged by the rhetorical practices of those disciplines. In order to learn about
professional writing, however, that introduction must be followed by more extensive
and integrated workplace experiences, such as work-study programs, internships, on-
the-job training, and other forms of transition between school and work.
     The learning continuum proposed in chapter 9 describes a range of experiences
that provide ever greater distance from the deliberately fashioned educational con-
texts of the school and ever greater integration into the improvised and often sponta-
neous learning opportunities of the workplace. (Note: Although the movement from
facilitated performance to legitimate peripheral participation does capture the profes-
sional development of many who pass through school and into the workplace, it is
not a required sequence; some people learn their practice entirely within the work-
place, without benefit of the careful scaffolding of facilitated performance.) In de-
scribing that transition, we have used the terms facilitated performance to refer to the
conditions and contexts for teaching and learning in universities, attenuated authentic
participation to point to the early stages of closely monitored and supervised learning
in the workplace, and legitimate peripheral participation (Lave & Wenger, 1991) to de-
scribe the activities that lead to learning for newcomers who have achieved some de-
gree of autonomy in their workplace involvement.



Source: Dias, Patrick, Aviva Freedman, Peter Medway, and Anthony Pare, “Virtual Realities: Transitions from University to
Workplace Writing,” In Worlds Apart: Acting and Writing in Academic and Workplace Contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1999, pp. 201-221.
424   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               As the learner moves out from the classroom toward professional practice, the
           moments and sites of learning become less clearly defined, and certain key features of
           learning and teaching change. There is a gradual increase in the authenticity of tasks;
           that is, their consequences and their influence on others and on activity escalates,
           and there is a parallel growth in their complexity or messiness: workplace tasks lack
           the exact moments of beginning and ending, the stated evaluation criteria, and the
           sharp divisions of labor that usually characterize school work. At the same time, there
           is a steady decrease in explicit attention to learning and in the degree of guidance or
           attenuation provided; students move from close supervision to autonomous practice
           as they make the transition from school to work. There are, too, subtle shifts in au-
           thority and expertise between learner and teacher; in school, the power and knowl-
           edge imbalance is marked, obvious, but newcomers to the workplace often bring cer-
           tain kinds of expertise (technical, theoretical) that oldtimers who supervise them do
           not have. A similar shift occurs in terms of evaluation; in school contexts, the learner
           is evaluated by the teacher, but in the workplace the apprentice and supervisor are as-
           sessed together, because newcomer and oldtimer often work as a team. Underlying
           these changes is a shift from the epistemic function of school writing (the individual
           student’s construction of knowledge) to the collective epistemic and instrumental
           goals of the workplace (the construction and application of institutional or commu-
           nity knowledge).
                In this chapter we look at students learning to write in and for different contexts,
           some in school, some at work, and some in between. Although the writing tasks in
           the first two contexts attempted to simulate or suggest aspects of the rhetorical con-
           texts of professional writing, neither could escape their ultimate location within an
           academic setting. And, it should be noted, neither was presented as an opportunity to
           learn how to write professionally. Writing in the school contexts was at the service of
           learning the discipline’s values, beliefs, and ways of knowing. Learning occurred in
           the workplace as well, but there writing was at the service of the community. The first
           three settings described below mark points on a trajectory away from the school and
           into the workplace; the last, which we describe in greater detail, represents a final
           stage on that continuum. Our analysis of each stage demonstrates the extent to
           which learning is contextual and contingent.



           LEARNING TO WRITE AT SCHOOL
           As explained in the previous chapter, the theoretical frame that accounts for how
           students learned to write in the university disciplinary classes we observed is best cap-
           tured by the term facilitated performance. Our argument is that this frame, based on
           Rogoff’s (1990) notion of guided participation, accounts for how university students
           learn discipline-specific writing in much the same way as guided participation ac-
           counts for early child language acquisition or cognitive apprenticeship in middle-
           class homes.
                The most salient commonality is that the guide in both cases, caregiver and
           teacher, is oriented entirely to the learner and to the learner’s learning. In fact, the
           activity is being undertaken primarily for the sake of the learner, and although the
                                              Dias, Freedman,   Medway,    Paré   ® Virtual Realities   425

conventions of neither writing nor language are explicitly taught, they are learned
because of the carefully shaped context. There is a focused and centered concentra-
tion on the learner and the activity which is quite different from what we see in the
instances of workplace-based learning described below (and that, as we noted in the
previous chapter, is quite different from what Rogoff [1993] and Heath [1983] re-
ported in non-middle-class-rearing).
     Not only is the guide’s attention focused on the learner, but the whole social con-
text has been organized by the guide for the sake of the learner. Rogoff’s caregiver or-
ganizes the storytime experience in much the same way that the instructors we ob-
served orchestrate their courses (within certain temporal, spatial, organizational
constraints): readings are set, lectures are delivered, seminars are or are not organized,
working groups are or are not set up, assignments are specified—all geared toward en-
abling the learners to learn certain material.
     Further, students did not, in the courses observed, learn to write new genres on
the basis of explicit direction by their guides (the instructors and teaching assistants),
except in the crudest terms with respect to format, length, and subject matter
(Freedman, 1993). Nevertheless the writing was shaped and constrained from the
first meeting of the course—that is, from its specification on the course outline and,
more significantly, from the first words uttered by the instructor.
      Our observations of these classes, and the students composing for them, revealed
that learning new genres in the classroom came about as a result of carefully orches-
trated processes of collaborative performance between course instructor and students:
the students learned through doing, and specifically learned through performing with
an attuned expert who structured the curriculum in such a way as to give to the stu-
dents more and more difficult tasks. The instructor both specified the task and set
that task in a rich discursive context. Both the collaborative performance and the or-
chestration of a richly evocative semiotic context enabled the acquisition and perfor-
mance of the new genres.
     At the beginning of a course in Financial Analysis, for example, the instructor
assigned cases to be written up at home and then he himself modeled in class appro-
priate approaches to the data, identifying key issues and specifying possible recom-
mendations for action. As they attempted to write up the cases themselves at home,
the students were “extremely frustrated” because “you have to do a case before you
have the tools to know how to do it.” “It’s like banging your head against a wall.”
However, the modeling in class, especially in the context of the students’ struggles to find
meaning in the data themselves, gradually enabled the students to make such intellec-
tual moves themselves. At the beginning, “when he would tell us the real issue, we’re
like—where did that come from?” Then “When you're done and he takes it up in
class, you finally know how to do it!” Modeling what the students would later do
themselves, the instructor presented a number of cases at the beginning of the course.
Like the mother with the storybook, the instructor showed the students first where to
look and then what to say, picking out the relevant data from the information in the
CaSse:~

      “What’s the significance of 7 and 8 in the text? Did it add to your thinking about this
     case?”
426   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               “At what market share restriction would that growth strategy not work?”

               “Assuming best case scenario, what will this company look like in 5 years?”

                He constructed arguments, using the warrants of, and based on the values and
           ideology valorized in, the discipline. Drawing on the simulated purposes for the case,
           he pointed to the importance of looking at and presenting information in particular
           ways:
               “As a consultant to the bank, is this a critical value to know?”

               “In real life, you have to quantify this relationship between business risk and financial
               risk.”

                After students began presenting the cases themselves orally in class, he provided
           corrective feedback:
               “Walk people through how you thought about the problem.”
               “Let people know what the agenda is and your role.”

                Gradually students were inducted into the ways of knowing, that is, the ways of
           construing and interpreting phenomena, valued in that discipline. That is, although
           they were learning a school genre that bore little resemblance to workplace genres,
           they were beginning to participate in the type of thinking encouraged by the rhetori-
           cal practices of their discipline.
                We see in facilitated performance many of the elements specified by Wood,
           Bruner, and Ross (1976) as functions of the tutor in scaffolding (as quoted in Rogoff,
           1990, pp. 93-94). The task is defined by the tutor; the tutor demonstrates an ideal-
           ized version of the act to be performed; and the tutor indicates or dramatizes the cru-
           cial discrepancies of collaborative performance offer part of the answer to how the
           students learned to write the genres expected of them. In addition, the instructor set
           up a rich discursive context, through his lectures and through the readings, and it is
           through the mediation of these signs that the students were able to engage appropri-
           ately in the tasks set.
                Wertsch (1991), drawing on Bakhtin, talks of the power of dialogism, and of
           echoing (or ventriloquating) of social languages and speech genres. The students that
           we observed responded—ventriloquistically—to the readings and the professor’s dis-
           course, as they worked through the tasks set for them. Initially, they picked up (and
           transformed in the context of their preexistent conversational patterns) the social
           language or register they had heard. Here are oral samples culled from the students’
           conversational interchanges as they worked on producing their case study:
               Allison: I figured this is how we should structure it. . . First, how did they get
                          there is the first thing.
                 Peter:   So that’s. ..
               Allison:   Business versus financial risk or operations versus debt. Whatever. . .
                          Then. . . like we will get it from the bankers’ perspective.
                 Peter:   Yeah, that’s pretty much like what I was thinking too.
               Allison:    So, right now I have their thing before ’78. How do you want it,
                          pre-’78 or post-’78? This is what I did. I went through all. . .
                                               Dias, Freedman,     Medway,    Paré   = Virtual Realities   427


       Peter:   Internal comparison and stuff.
                                             KKKKKK


    Allison:    I guess the biggest thing is the debt-to-equity ratio. Notice that? X
                has way more equity. If you look at Y, their equity compared to
                their debts is nowhere near, it’s not even in the ballpark.
       Peter:   Which company is it that took a whole bunch of short-term debt?
Then, in the writing of their papers, the conversational syntax, lexicon, and intona-
tional contours of their conversation exchanges disappeared, as they reproduced the
discipline-specific terms in the context of academic written English, achieving, thus,
the written social register designated by their professor as that of a “financial analyst”
(see Freedman et al., 1994). In the final draft of a case study, we find the following:

    Short-term debt restructuring is a necessity. The 60% ratio must be reduced to be more in
    line with past trends and with the competition. This will be achieved by extension of
    debt maturities, conversion of debt to equity, reduction of interest rates, as well as deferral
    of interest payments.

In other words, through the mediation of an appropriation of the social languages
provided by the professor’s discourse and the readings, the students created the new
genres expected of them: ways of knowing became ways of saying. The epistemic so-
cial motive of school is met when the professor determines that the discipline’s
knowledge and ways of knowing are satisfactorily displayed in the completed text;
then, a grade is assigned and the text reaches closure.


BETWEEN SCHOOL AND WORK
It is possible to distinguish between school-based attempts to introduce students to
disciplinary ways of knowing, such as the case-study assignment described above, and
those fuller immersions that occur when students balance their time and attention be-
tween the classroom and a workplace. Various forms of such an arrangement may al-
low students to make forays into work settings, receive visits from practitioners, han-
dle professional documentation, and address actual workplace issues and problems, all
in the context of a particular course. Evaluation in these situations, even when there is
consultation with practitioners, is primarily an instructor's responsibility. Typically,
students in this type of course prepare reports for the workplaces they visit, and repre-
sentatives of the workplace may be invited to hear and respond to oral presentations of
student research results. (Such an assignment is described in chap. 4.)
     One of the most successful of this kind of learning experience that we have ob-
served occurred in a 4th-year course in systems analysis. The course engaged students
in writing that, in contrast to the simulation of a case study, succeeded in giving them
a real experience of workplace discourse, though it was a highly scaffolded and pro-
tected introduction. However, as with the case study, there was no explicit writing in-
struction. However, as with the case study, there was no explicit writing instruction
in the systems analysis course, and no stated intention to teach workplace writing.
428   Chapter 8 # Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               The systems analysis course was organized as follows: every year that she teaches
           the course, the instructor finds six client-organizations who need to have their sys-
           tems analyzed and redesigned; a total of 30 students are allowed to register, and stu-
           dents are selected by competition; the students are divided into groups of five.
           Criteria for nomination to specific groups include the following: each group is as-
           signed someone with a background in accounting and another with a background in
           computing, as well as someone who has a car. A cardinal rule is that friends are to be
           separated, so that students gain experience working with people that they are not al-
           ready familiar with or even fond of. Each group is assigned to a separate place of work,
           and must consequently solve the specific problem in that work environment. In order
           to do so, and in the course of doing so, they produce the following three kinds of doc-
           uments:
               1. a problem definition document (on the basis of a feasibility study);
               2. systems specification document (on the basis of their systems analysis),
                  which includes several alternatives as part of the structured specification;
               3. a general design document.
                In order to perform these tasks, students must go to the workplace to interview a
           range of practitioners there, the range determined by the needs and possibilities of
           that specific work environment. At the first interview, they are accompanied by the
           course instructor, who guides the interview when necessary and spends considerable
           time going over what was learned with the students involved.
                In addition, each group reports back to the class as a whole three times, giving
           oral versions of their drafts of each of the three key documents. After these presenta-
           tions, they receive feedback from the class, hand in their written document to the in-
           structor, and then, at a separately scheduled interview, receive intensive feedback
           from her as to appropriate revisions. Sometimes further interviews with her are neces-
           sary. When she is satisfied, a written document is presented to the client, sometimes
           accompanied by an oral presentation, if the client so desires. The course is a half-
           course, the timeline is carefully spelled out at the beginning, and nothing is handed
           in late.
               Clearly, this is school work with a difference, and that difference is the dual ex-
           ploitation of both the academic and workplace settings. The workplace adds some
           critical features to the learning context. Perhaps most importantly, it provides au-
           thentic tasks. As the professor said about this course (Duxbury & Chinneck, 1993),
           “the process involves coping systematically with the complexities of the real world,
           including both human and technological limitations.” Students have to “limit the
           area of study, abstract essential features subdivide a complex whole into parts of man-
           ageable size and model a real system to show the relationship among its compo-
           nents.”” As opposed to traditional lectures in systems analysis and design, which give
           the students a tremendous amount of technical information, this course conveys the
           real-world people skills needed to be a good systems analyst. The communication
           skills, diplomacy and other human issues are not easily transmitted in a book or in the
           classroom.
                 Students gain experience in handling ambiguous situations and in developing so-
           lutions subject to real-world constraints. Working with actual problems also develops
                                                  Dias, Freedman,    Medway,     Paré   ® Virtual Realities     429


analytical skills and problem-solving abilities, gives an understanding of the impor-
tance of organizational influences on systems design and the impact that a user-re-
quested change has on the analysis and design process.
     More specifically, the instructor lists some of the strengths of the program as fol-
lows:
      students gain a “more perspective on the systems analysis process”; students “learn to
      work cooperatively in groups”; students learn to “critique each other”; the task “enables
      students to integrate the knowledge gained from other business courses.”

     In comparison to case-study writing, the writing in this course is situated quite
differently along the continuum that is mapped in Table 1. Like case-study writing,
this course is situated in an institutional context, to the extent that it has a course
number, it counts as credit toward a degree, and it is constrained by the time limits of
a single semester. But there are important ways in which it is different, ways that are
revealed especially when we think in terms of the writing’s double social motive, one
served by the rhetorical exigences of school work, the other by the exigences of the
workplace.
     Our analysis of student interactions, composing sessions, and drafts, shows how
the systems analysis course offered an interesting hybrid of features, a kind of bridge
across the gap between school and work. The audience was both instructor and
client. (The instructor was always the first reader and her views, as evaluator, were al-
ways important. At the same time, the students always referred to their clients and to
their clients’ needs and goals in their composing sessions.)
     One textual indication of the hybrid nature of this transaction was that students
kept having to adjust the amount of shared knowledge they provided: as they went
from presenting their documents to class and teacher to preparing the document for
their clients, they needed to revise the amount and kind of shared information. A re-
current feature of their revision was the removal of information that they could as-
sume to be shared with their clients.
      The social motive of the writing, like that of the workplace, was to recommend
real-world action. (On the other hand, an incidental or possibly auxiliary purpose

                       Table 1. Changing Aspects
                                             of Writing inThree Contexts
                                     Case-Study            School/Workplace                     Internship
1. audience:                 instructor: colleagues       client; instructor              supervisor;
2. social motive:            epistemic                    epistemic; instrumental         epistemic; instrumental
3. reader's concern:         writer's knowing             writer's knowing;               value to collective
                                (value to student)           value to client
4. knowledge:                shared                       chared and new                  new
5. reader's goal:            evaluation                   evaluation; ensure              ensure best text; apply
                                                             text                            knowledge
6. reader's comments:        justify grade                revision-oriented;              revision-oriented;
                                                             response                        response
7. closure:                  grade                        grade; indeterminate            indeterminate
J
430   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



          was always kept in mind: an epistemic goal for the writing was recognized by both the
           instructor and the students in their discussions.) The whole exercise was undertaken
           in order to learn how to perform in a real-world setting, with real-world constraints.
          Contrast this with the response, cited in chapter 9, of officers in a government agency
          who said with some degree of irritation that their novice employees could “learn on
           their own time.” (It’s not that learning does not occur; it’s that no one sees this as an
          institutional goal.)
               Perhaps the most revealing difference was the changed role of the teacher.
          Rather than teacher as evaluator, the instructor functioned in the role of supervisor:
          she collaborated with the students extensively. She accompanied them to the first in-
          terview, and discussed the interview with them afterward, carefully pointing to key
          features and eliciting appropriate understanding. For each piece of writing, she both
          evaluated (gave a low grade at the beginning) and wrote extensive suggestions for re-
          vision, insisting that they revise until they produced the best possible text.
               This points to a larger kind of difference. This writing that the students were do-
          ing in the systems analysis course was different from typical student writing in that
          the instructor regarded it as reflecting on her (and the institution) in much the same
          way that a subordinate’s writing in the workplace reflects on the manager. This stands
          in sharp contrast to most instructors’ attitude toward their students’ writing, which is
          considered to reflect on the students’ rather than the teachers’ competence.
               A related point, explored more fully in chapter 4, is that instructors have a
          vested interest in a quality spread; it is indeed important that there be some A’s (as
          confirmation that the appropriate teaching has taken place), but it is equally impor-
          tant that there be many B’s and C’s. Something that underlies all university activity,
           and that so easily becomes invisible to us in its normalcy, is the institution’s function
           as a gatekeeper. This function is not incidental, something that we must contend
           with from time to time and can ignore until the actual time for reporting grades; it is
           pervasive and powerful, shaping the dynamics of the rhetorical exigence in in-
           eluctable fashion.
                The writing we observed in the systems analysis course describes a midway point
           in the gulf between academic and workplace settings. Though based in the university
           and shaped by some of that institution’s epistemic motives, the writing was very
           much like that of the workplace—in the social roles taken on by writers and readers,
           in its sense of audience, in its textual features (e.g., shared information, surplus of cor-
           roborating detail), and most markedly in the responding and collaborative reading
           practices of its first reader, the instructor, who served as a guide to the realities of
           workplace rhetoric, much as a supervising practitioner might. Finally, to return to our
           comparisons in Table 1, we have observed that case-study writers feel closure when
           the grade is given, and the text cease to have importance (and often physical exis-
           tence) at that point. For the systems analysis course, the writing was graded as well,
           but its existence was not entirely shaped nor ended by that grade: the documents led
           a continued and indeterminate existence in the clients’ workplace. Like written doc-
           uments we had observed in other workplace settings, their completion indicated their
           entry into a larger arena where their continued physical existence as documents
           along with their potential for material consequences could only be guess at.
                                               Dias, Freedman,    Medway,    Paré   ® Virtual Realities   431


     The systems analysis course provides a useful perspective into workplace univer-
sity differences. At the same time, it points as well to other kinds of programs (not so
directly university-based) that might allow for easier and more easily scaffolded tran-
sitions to authentic workplace writing context: sheltered co-ops, work-study pro-
grams, and internships like those described below.



LEARNING TO WRITE AGAIN: ATTENUATED
AUTHENTIC PARTICIPATION
Another step away from the university typically locates student in an actual work-
place, and involves them in what we have called attenuated authentic participation.
During this stage, students work alone, in pairs, or in small groups with a single su-
pervisor. In some cases, interns are evaluated both by university and workplace su-
pervisors, but for the most part the work they do and the texts they author belong to
the workplace community. The interns that we observed learning the genres appro-
priate to the government agencies and social work settings to which they were as-
signed went through processes that, in some ways, were fundamentally similar to
those entailed in the university settings. Common to both kinds of learning was the
fact that learning took place as a result of collaboration, in the widest sense, or
shared social engagement, as well as the fact that this. learning took place through
the mediation of sociocultural tools (primarily, but not solely, linguistic signs).
There were important differences, however, and these differences are all the more
significant for being tacit and implicit, complicating the transition into the work-
place, and requiring that students learn in ways quite different from the ways they
normally experience in classrooms.
     The attenuated authentic participation that characterizes initial workplace expe-
riences includes certain essential components: real but limited tasks, timely assis-
tance, a grasp of rhetorical purposes, and a big picture or overview of the community.
In addition, such participation, based as it is in the workplace rather than in the uni-
versity, must offer the newcomer a sense of membership or belonging and the oppor-
tunity to play multiple roles in a variety of workplace relationships. When all these
factors are in place, the newcomer is drawn toward mature practice.
     We have noted that the participation of newcomers influences the workplace
community in ways at once more obvious and more subtle than do course-based work
projects, such as the systems analysis course described above. We believe this is a
defining characteristic of situated learning in the workplace, marking it as essentially
different from school-based learning experiences. A frequent form of influence can be
found in the interaction between newcomers and their workplace supervisors (the
oldtimers who usually volunteer to work with students). Eileen, one such oldtimer,
said: “I still enjoy the feedback from the students and the sharing. | don’t really see it
as a one-way... . | feel I get a lot back in return.” Other comments from supervisors:
    1 also find that [supervision] helps me to keep fresh in a way. Students obviously see things
    in a new kind of way and when you've been working in the field for 30 years you tend to
    see things in one way, so that I find that it keeps me thinking, stimulated. (Risa)
432   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               I told her [a social work intern] that | felt when we had joint interviews that I learned
               from her because it was a different perspective. Questions that she may have thought of
               asking | just haven’t. And also when you're in practice for so many years, sometimes you
               get quite stuck and you handle interviews the same way. And she was fresh and new and
               just out -—just in school, actually—and the theory is so down pat. (Eliza)

                Newcomers also influence the workplace community as a whole. Whereas the
           work done as part of course-based projects, including student-authored reports, may
           well be ignored or little valued in the workplace, the work of interns generally con-
           tributes to the community’s efforts. Newcomers bring new ideas and theories, new ap-
           proaches and practices, and these can alter the community. When newcomer partici-
           pation results in a contribution—a meaningful contribution, one that affects and
           changes the community—newcomers experience a sense of belonging, a sense of
           membership. This last point is critical. Along with Lave (1991), we see a developing
           sense of membership as essential to effective workplace learning: “Developing an
           identity as a member of a community and becoming knowledgeably skillful are part of
           the same process, with the former motivating, shaping, and giving meaning to the
           latter, which it subsmes” (p. 65).
                 The following scene, reconstructed from field notes, is authentic and captures
           this process of joining the community, as well as many other significant features of
           workplace learning. Any extended analysis and commentary is in square brackets.
           The setting is a Canadian government office; Douglas is the learner and Richard is
           his mentor or supervisor.
               Douglas and Richard are observed as they respond to a sudden request to prepare a brief-
               ing note on the state of a particular set of negotiations for a new government minister.
               [Political events such as the appointments of new ministers often interrupt the antici-
               pated flow of business in Canadian government offices. Mentors or supervisors must im-
               provise, if they are to include the learners in the new tasks. Both must be agile.]
               Douglas and Richard are standing in front of a desk which has a pile of previous briefing
               notes and reports on these negotiations. Their task is to develop a new briefing document,
               summarizing succinctly what the new minister needs to know.
               The two discuss the potential content in global terms, brainstorming on a whiteboard,
               and then they sit down to write. Richard suggests that they work collaboratively. Douglas
               understands this to mean dividing up the task in two, with each taking responsibility for
               one half. [Presumably this reflects his notion of collaboration, based on what passed for
               collaboration as it was undertaken in university.]
               Richard corrects this misconception, explaining that he means that they will actually
               produce the whole text together: the two of them sitting together to generate and com-
               pose test, with one person assigned to do the actual inputting. There is some joking and
               jockeying about who will do the inputting, but Richard decides that Douglas’s superior
               expertise in word-processing (he can use Windows) warrants his taking the seat in front
               of the computer. [It is not untypical in the workplace for novices to display superior ex-
               pertise in relevant skills.]
               The two proceed to formulate and reformulate text together, with Richard taking the lead
               and providing feedback to each of Douglas’ suggestions, but at the same time constantly
               eliciting suggestions and listening carefully to Douglas’ comments about his own sugges-
                                              Dias, Freedman,    Medway,     Paré   ®   Virtual Realities   433


    tions. The two respond to each other conversationally in a series of half-sentences, which
    reveals the highly interactive nature of the interchange. Each half-sentence responds to
    and builds on the previous, so that the product becomes more and more jointly generated.
    [This kind of interactive generating and composing between a guide and learner is hard to
    imagine in a school context, even in a tutoring center. The co-participation often reaches
    a flow at which it is difficult to determine who is suggesting which words.]

    Complicating this interactiveness further is the interaction with already extant texts.
    Each suggestion for the new text is based in large part on the briefing notes and reports
    that are already available in the documents in front of them, with the words and phrases
    being modified, echoed, reaccentuated, qualified. [These earlier text are cultural artifacts,
    which have been shaped by, and encode, the cultural practices and choices of the organi-
    zation as it has evolved to that point. In Bakhtin’s terms, the words in the new evolving
    documents are being echoed from the earlier ones, and reaccentuated in the light of the
    current “speech plan,” so that the words become reinfused with slightly different mean-
    ings. This dialogism and mediation through cultural artifacts is true of university writing
    and hence learning as well, but without the complicating factor of the intersubjective ac-
    tivities of guide and learner.]

     What we are seeing here is persons-in-activity-with-the-world as mediated
through the technological tools (word-processing software) and the cultural artifacts
available. The newcomer joins the network of distributed cognition. There is a
hermeneutic grappling with notions, and it is sometimes difficult to discover where
one thinker’s processes ends and the other’s begin, and where the new speech plan
begins and the influence of older cultural artifacts recedes.
     In order to begin feeling like a member of the community, especially in large in-
stitutions, social work student interns must quickly gain a picture of the entire collec-
tive endeavor and their own place in it. This picture includes the intricate and subtle
geography of place and politics: the physical and organizational structure of the com-
munity. In the complex world of a large general hospital, for example, this geography
includes all of the areas of specialized care, the laboratories, the wards, the hierarchy
of the disciplines and individuals that inhabit the institution, and the community’s
network of complementary and conflicting interests. Eliza, a hospital-based social
work supervisor, explains: “I find for the first. . month there’s an enormous amount
of time spent really just orienting [students] to a hospital situation because that in it-
self is a complex world.” She continues: “What I do is have them go to as many staff
meetings and as many of structured kinds of things that are going on on the unit as
possible at the beginning, both staff and patient things, so that they’re sort of inun-
dated with people and things happening.”
     The key to this orientation process is total immersion in the community’s activi-
ties. Initial learning happens while newcomers are simply observing, or “sitting by
Nellie,” as it was called when apprentices observed veteran factory hands in the early
days of industrialization (Clews & Magnuson, 1996). According to a social work
newcomer, Natasha, “my first two weeks was a lot of observation: attending rounds,
being introduced to people, and a few meetings.” Newcomers are not told what to
look for or what to learn; instead, “they’re sort of inundated with people and things
happening.” The questions that arise belong to the students, and the supervisors an-
swer them when the students need answers.
434   Chapter 8 ® Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               But early in their field placements, most social work students become more than
          passive observers at meetings or interviews: they respond to telephone calls, research
          available community resources, speak to medical staff. In short, they are included in
          community life, rather than studying it from afar. The supervisors we have inter-
          viewed spent little or no time preparing students before sending them on errands, giv-
          ing them small tasks, bringing them to meetings or other events, and asking them to
          observe elements of practice. Indeed, most had nothing that could be called a delib-
          erate curriculum, or even a set sequence of activities that constituted a learning path.
               It is within the workplace community’s public settings and in contacts with indi-
          viduals from other professions in the hospital that the social work newcomers begin
          to feel like members of their own social work community and of the larger institu-
          tional community. They begin to learn the rituals and dynamics of community prac-
          tice, the subtle tensions of institutional power and influence, and—most importantly
          for our purposes—they begin to learn about writing. That is, they begin to learn how,
          where, what, when, and why language occurs in the multiprofessional context of the
          institution. They participate in the heteroglossia of hospital life, the many specialized
           discourses about patients. They begin to learn what doctors, nurses, therapists, lab
           technicians, and psychologists care about, and how their own concerns are in concert
           or conflict with others. They begin to learn who can speak, when they can speak, and
           what they can say. They begin to enter the complex social world in which social work
           texts must operate, the world described in chapter 6.
                When supervisors sense that this process has begun, they increase the new-
           comer’s participation by turning cases over to the student. This case load is authentic,
           because newcomers work with actual people who have real problems, and attenuated,
           because the cases are not critical or overly difficult and supervisors step in to do or
           help with some aspects. As we noted in the previous chapter, learning is incidental
           and occurs as part of participation in the community of practice (COP), whose activ-
           ities are oriented toward practical or material outcomes. Instruction is secondary to,
           or a byproduct of, institutional activity. In a sense, there is a reversal of the tradi-
           tional order of instruction; rather than preceding performance or application, as is
           usual in school, teaching in the workplace often occurs during or even after he ac-
           complishment of new tasks. As Eileen, a supervisor, noted: “After we do things, par-
           ticularly do things together, [we] sit down and try to dissect things and I tell him,
           When | did that, this is what I was thinking.” For such teaching to be successful, the
           oldtimers who act as field educators must carefully engineer and monitor tasks.
                As social work interns move out of the initial stage of orientation and observa-
           tion, and take on the beginnings of a case load, they must begin to produce the regu-
           lar and occasional documents required by mature practice. In most agencies and insti-
           tutions, this includes referral forms, assessments, progress reports, transfer and closing
           summaries, and all the usual rhetorical flora and fauna of institutional life: memos,
           letters, government forms, and so on. According to Colin, a supervisor: “Students
           who come here . . . should be expected to write all the different reports. It shouldn’t
           be that they’re following these cases but don’t take on the paper work side of it and
           only do the clinical side. They should take on. . . all the different dimensions of what
           it means to be a social worker.”
                                                Dias, Freedman, Medway,         Paré   = Virtual Realities   435


    Newcomers receive very little advance assistance with this sort of task, although
they receive as much feedback as they need, when they need it. Some scaffolding is
provided, in the form of a format and some detail, but the newcomer is left to write
the report, which must then be cosigned by the supervisor (following a collaborative
revision process described below). Interviews, information searches, telephone calls,
and other information gathering is done by the newcomer, closely monitored by the
supervisor. Much of what is learned in this process is not addressed explicitly.
Although we have seen workplace settings where some discourse practices are codi-
fied as guidelines, most rhetorical: lore is implicit: for example, perhaps no one uses
first-person pronouns in certain documents, but that interdiction is nowhere in print
and cannot be traced to an authority. A major means of passing along this sort of
thetorical regularity is the practice of sending newcomers to the files to look at previ-
ous examples of required documentation, usually under the guidance of a supervisor.
A supervisor in a group home for adolescents, Colin, describes the place of files in the
abrupt transition from school to the “real world”:

    [Students would] be assigned anywhere from three to five cases within the first week or
    two. And then they’d be told to go and look at the file and to pull the file and to look
    through and they would see the different kinds of reports that they’re expected to do in
    there. . . We basically try and get the students to handle the normal responsibilities of the
    social worker. . . |guess the way I see it, you have to. In some ways, this is a kind of expe-
    rience to the students of what it’s like in the real world.

     Reliance on existing texts realizes some of the key criteria for a successful transi-
tion, both for the individual and for the community: the newcomer gets to model the
text produced by oldtimers, thus emulating mature practice, and the community gets
to reproduce itself, while being revitalized by the unique contributions of each new-
comer. Again, no explicit discipline-wide, or even agency-wide, policy on training
appears o be in effect, and yet supervisor after supervisor does the same thing: sends
the student newcomers to the files. Supervisors are careful to exploit the newcomer’s
early struggles with aspects of practice, because they offer what teachers often call “a
teachable moment”: a fortuitous opportunity to offer guidance. Eliza, a supervisor, ex-
plains: “Well, I think my basic philosophy is that you, as much as possible, try to al-
low the student[s] to go with it on their own, to have as much freedom—unless they
run into, or you feel they’re going to run into, real snags, at which point you inter-
vene, or help, or support, or do for, or whatever.” Again, opportunities to write appear
to be apt moments for introducing newcomers to the subtleties of community life and
practice, and a form of “document cycling” (Paradis, Dobrin, & Miller, 1985; Smart,
1993) procides plenty of opportunities, as this excerpt from an interview with
Natasha, a student, indicates:

    I would do my assessments, [the supervisor] would look at them and then give me her
    feedback and suggestions and, uh, areas that might be reworked or what have you. So it
  ~ was essentially like that: [the supervisor] sort of like corrected me, “here's it back, and let's
    talk about it and discuss.”
436   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               In the workplace, as Natasha points out, the emphasis is different: “Something
          that we highlighted as a goal, in our initial contract, was to look at my writing and
          improve my writing skills. You know, not so much the grammar and the spelling, but
          the skill of writing in the field.” Certainly, the rhetorical sophistication described by
          Glenn, a student newcomer, in the following interview excerpt seems tied closely to
          particular workplace circumstances:
               I began to learn how to be more concise, more focused in my writing. My supervisor at the
               fagency] tried to teach me how to say a lot but not very much, meaning, you know, there
               are certain innuendoes to what | was saying, um, while protecting certain things of confi-
               dentiality between myself and my client.

               To “say a lot but not very much” demonstrates a rhetorical skill that cannot be
          taught outside a context and practice in which those measurements make sense.
          What constitutes an “innuendo”? For whom will the text “say a lot” without saying
          “Very much,” and what is too much? What is the worker-client relationship, and how
          would it be affected by breaking the standards of confidentiality, some of which are
          universally prescribed by law and others which are local and largely tacit? These are
          questions that have no answer outside of particular circumstances, and the generali-
          ties about confidentiality that are offered in a school setting are likely to mean little
           in the field, where each worker-client relationship is different, and where the secrets
          of a persons’ life are defined by who reads reports and for what purpose. These lessons,
          the subtleties of culture, are learned in the centripetal pull of authentic attenuated
          participation, as the newcomer gradually transforms into an oldtimer.
               To sum up: typically, early in the newcomer’s workplace experience, learning
          takes place through engagement in active processes, guidance by mentors, and medi-
          ation through cultural tools. In this respect, the learning is like that of the university
          setting. What is different is the nature of the interactive co-participation and collab-
          oration between mentor and learner; the improvisatory nature of the task; its authen-
          ticity and ecological validity in a larger context (the institution and indeed society as
          a whole); and the varied and shifting roles played by mentor and _ learner.
           Furthermore, there is no deliberate attention paid to the learner” learning; all atten-
           tion is directed to the task at hand and its successful completion.


          LATER STAGES: LEGITIMATE PERIPHERAL PARTICIPATION
           In a final stage between school and full mature practice, students in the workplace be-
           gin to work autonomously. Even in their initial forays into the field as undergradu-
           ates, social work students are often expected to take on a version of mature practice.
           Colin, a supervisor we interviewed put it this way: “I’m a believer in trying to engage
           a student immediately in terms of doing and participating in clinical work. So as soon
           as the student comes in, literally the first day of placement, I have two cases on my
           desk waiting for her... 1 think that the most important thing to start off with is the
           case right away.” When social work students reach the senior undergraduate or gradu-
           ate level and enter their final field placements, or when they complete their programs
           and enter the profession, their experience even more closely resembles traditional ap-
           prenticeship in professional practice. Guidance is decreased, responsibility increased,
                                                 Dias, Freedman,     Medway,    Paré   = Virtual Realities   437


and the newcomer blends into the community. This is the stage of legitimate periph-
eral participation:
    Once I began, my supervisor said, “Here’s a case,” gave me some background and said,
    “Go ahead.” To me that was great. . . |wanted to learn to. . . have my own style and this
    was a great way for me to do it. It was a learning experience and I have achieved my goal.
    So, for me, that autonomy was good for me. (Kate)

     As we note in the previous chapter, Hanks (1991) describes legitimate peripheral
participation as “an interactive process in which the apprentice engages by simulta-
neously performing in several roles—status subordinate, learning practitioner, sole re-
sponsible agent in minor parts of the performance, aspiring expert, and so forth—
each implying a different sort of responsibility, a different set of role relations, and a
different interactive involvement” (p. 23). These factors were conspicuously missing
from the following negative experience, a field placement that did not engage the
newcomer Spiro in legitimate peripheral participation:
    In my experience at [agency], I was essentially isolated from the team. There was no team
    to go to. Even though | was a “member” [gestures to indicate quotation marks] of the
    team, I was not officially interacting with any of the team. . . I think that to feel you’re on
    side you need to be with colleagues and to exchange clinical impressions, to learn from
    others. . . with their vast experience, I think, is essential.

    Q: Did you do any writing?
    A: [Yes, but] it was very confusing because it wasn’t clear as to what exactly they wanted.
    So I would get back, you know, I would submit [the report] to my supervisor and my su-
    pervisor would look at it and most of the parts were okay. There were some parts that just
    needed total revision. Why I couldn’t know this beforehand is beyond me. . . the expecta-
    tions of my field work, my written work, was | would say, generally unclear. So I think the
    demand is left up to trial and error, I suppose. . . But it never really clicks in until the time
    comes when you're actually writing it yourself and you know the family or you have a
    good impression of where the family is at.

Lave and Wenger (1991) argue that learning is “an evolving form of membership” (p.
53); learning is thwarted when the learner is isolated, as was the student quoted
above. He wrote a report and even received guidance from a supervisor, but the writ-
ing was out of context, he was not a member of a community and therefore had no
role or responsibility, and the activity involved no authentic interaction. Compare
this to another internship experience (excerpts from two interviews with the same
student, Raymond):
    The first two weeks I was completely disoriented. The hospital was very intimidating to
    me, I was lost. | didn’t know where to go and I didn’t really feel grounded at all, so I felt
    lost. . But then when I got my first case, I was able to feel a little more oriented and more
    like I had a role here.

    [By] participating in rounds. . . I’m understanding | guess the culture of it all. I’m feeling a
  ~ part of it more than an outsider. . The culture, you know, it’s a big system, and there’s a
    culture that goes on; like in rounds talking about patients, and the language that’s used. . .
    And I guess | feel validated in a way I guess, you know, that what I’m doing, it’s not just
    superficial, on a superficial level. . . now I just feel more involved and more part of it.
438   Chapter 8 = Writing Yourself into Professional Writing and Rhetoric



               Like Lave and Wenger (1991), we see this movement toward membership as crit-
          ical to the workplace learning experience. Knowledge is inseparable from a sense of
          identity and a sense of location within a group; and knowledge-making is always a
          collaborative activity. Engagement in the activities that produce the group’s special-
          ized knowledge leads to membership in the group. Spiro, a social work student we
          cited earlier, describes the collaboration:
               Q: How are you learning to do [assessment reports]?

               A: There are several ways. . . assessment workers do the same thing: gathering your infor-
               mation; gathering your data from the file material; doing interviews with people that have
               been involved with the child—whether it’s a child care worker, a social worker, you get a
               different perspective on the problems; team feedback, because | present the case and get
               feedback on it, and based on the feedback we try to address the problems or the issues;
               and individuals—consultation with [fellow student], for example.

                Note the changes that occur in this student’s account of learning how to write a
           regular agency document: initially, he reports what others do; then he switches to the
           generic “you”; next he presents the case and gets feedback; and, finally, the team
           (“we”) addresses the problem. Consider, too, the extensive interaction: with other
           texts, with child care and social workers, with team members, and with a fellow stu-
           dent. There is a sense here of membership, of working with others in partnership.
           Spiro elaborates on his field experience:
               We would have assessment team meetings, and there were various aspects within the as-
               sessment process that needed some clarification. Besides, I did the first couple of them
               with [fellow student]... We basically shared a lot of ideas and that was a very interesting
               process, that was. And we would pull our supervisor aside, too, and bounce off ideas, and
               other colleagues. So we had resources. We could access our team. We could access our su-
               pervisor. .. ] was put, and [fellow student] was put, in a situation where we have to re-
               spond. . . not only to the family but. . . to the Director of Assessment—what the require-
               ments, policies, and things of that nature need to reflect. We have to respond to the
               Director of Professional Services. . . | think it’s very important to respond to what the so-
               cial worker needs to know and what the child care worker needs to know. So, we’re writ-
               ing basically to a family of professionals that need to know where to go with this case.

                Here, unmistakably, is a newcomer engaged in legitimate peripheral participa-
           tion. He is a member of a team, operating as an equal (but still under supervision),
           and he is situated within the network of actions, interests, and individuals that con-
           stitute this COP. His tasks are no longer attenuated, and though reports are still
           cosigned at this late stage, they are rarely much revised by supervisors. The student’s
           focus is on achieving a goal, on doing something with his text, on performing mature
           practice.



           CONCLUSION
           Our observations of school and workplace learning and writing have made us cau-
           tious about making generalizations. Clearly, learning is profoundly situated, as is writ-
           ing: learning to write in particular contexts is indistinguishable from learning to par-
                                               Dias, Freedman,    Medway,    Paré   ® Virtual Realities   439


ticipate in the full range of actions that constitute the activity in those contexts. As
we argues in the previous chapter, students who move from university to the work-
place and fail to recognize the differences in learning context and conditions risk
missing the point. However, as the discussion in this chapter makes clear, there are
ways to help student newcomers experience the practitioner’s rhetorical life and, in
so doing, learn something about workplace writing.
     A condition central to the experiences of professional writing described in this
chapter was their authenticity, or virtual rhetorical reality: the students in the two
workplace settings had a real impact, they actually influenced action. Another im-
portant and closely related condition was the primacy of instrumentality. The stu-
dents obviously learned something from their experience, but the learning was sec-
ondary to, or a by-product of, the instrumental purpose of their writing. Perhaps most
importantly, the students’ experiences were carefully monitored, scaffolded, and con-
trolled by oldtimers who took advantage of specific moments of uncertainty or confu-
sion to offer relevant advice. It is this careful balancing between actual practice and
timely instruction that we feel characterizes successful transitions into workplace
writing.

DEVELOPING YOUR UNDERSTANDING
  1. Staring with Table 1 as the basis for a visual, and then adding rows or additional visuals
     you think more effectively capture the contents of the article, prepare a 10-minute oral
     presentation for your class summarizing the transition from school to workplace writing.
  2. Dias et al., claim that internship experiences require you to learn in quite different ways
     than classroom settings do. Summarize these differences, and based on them, develop
     learning strategies interns can employ to maximize their internship learning experiences.
  3. Internships can sometimes decay into filing/copying temp-jobs, but interns can keep that
     from happening by taking on an active role in structuring their internship experiences.
     Identify some of the essential components of an effective internship, as mentioned in the
     article, and develop a set of suggestions to fellow classmates that can help them actively
     structure these essential components into future internships.
  4. After an extended example where Dias et al. describe a newcomer’s successful entrance
     into a Canadian government office, they summarize the point of the example by saying:
    The newcomer joins the network of distributed cognition. There is a hermeneutic grap-
    pling with notions, and it is sometimes difficult to discover where one thinker's pro-
    cesses end and the other's begin, and where the new speech plan begins and the influ-
    ence of older cultural artifacts recedes.

    Put this into your own words and explain why their summary of the example points to a
    significant aspect in the transition from school to workplace writing.
                  CHAPTER            8

                  Projects
           1. The most obvious way you can “write yourself into the field” of professional writing and
              rhetoric is to apply for an internship or job. If you have not had a writing internship and are
              not yet ready to graduate, now is the time to get one. It is best if you can get such experi-
              ence early, giving yourself time to have more than one internship before graduating. Not
              only do you get more experience, but you also get a better sense of what kind of writing
              work you may want to pursue. If you are ready for the market, internship experience or not,
              it is important that you carefully search for the kind of position for which you are ready and
              that will help you move toward your career goals. (Remember, though, that you probably
              won't start right off writing features for National Geographic or managing the technical pub-
              lications team for the next “hot” software package.)
               Locate ten or more internships or jobs appropriate for you. You can use common online job
               search sites, as well as specialized professional writing organizational sites, like the Society
               of Technical Communicators and the American Medical Writers Association. Once you have
      SEHOSHHHOHEHREHSHESHACHOHEHTHOHOHEHOSSHEHLOHOHFOHHESHSESEHEHEE


               located ten or more appropriate position openings, focus in on three. Do some research on
               the organizations. Find out what you can about the demands of the particular positions for
               which you will be applying. Design a resume and cover letter, and complete whatever appli-
               cation processes are required for each of the three positions. Your course instructor will help
               guide you through the various processes required to complete this project.
            . One of the ways you can “write yourself into the field” of professional writing and rhetoric is
              to create a portfolio. Traditionally, you would put together a printed collection of your work,
              designed to illustrate the breadth and depth of your professional knowledge. In our current
              e-culture, though, it makes sense to create paperless folios, or e-folios to complement print-
              based portfolios. Print-based portfolios cannot be widely distributed without great cost, and
              they cannot effectively present electronic media projects, such as Web sites, multimedia pre-
              sentations, online help, and databases. Creating an e-folio helps you overcome these print-
              based portfolio limitations.
              In order to create an e-folio, take time to find Web sites that display some samples. As you
              conduct this initial research, notice that portfolios are more than mere collections of peo-
              ple’s work; they are documents that define who someone is as a professional. Furthermore,
              since an e-folio is itself a professional writing document, your portfolio will become an ex-
              ample of your work. As a result, you should carefully plan, design, execute, and maintain
              yours.
              Create your own e-folio. In doing so, you will be faced will a great deal of the questions and
              issues that have been addressed      in this textbook. For instance, when thinking about the
              technological context, you will need to determine if a Web site or CD is better suited to your
              purposes. You will need to carefully consider the multiple audiences who might use your e-
              folio: what will their needs and purposes be, and what visual design will best suit your con-
              tent and context? If you are constructing a Web site, you should think about the kind of so-
              cial space you wish to create: do you want to create spaces where your users can become
              authors, say through forms or e-mail links, and what kinds of links can you incorporate that
              produce a network advantageous to you and your readers? You will also need to think care-



440
                                                                                  Chapter 8 ® Projects   441


 fully through traditional portfolio questions, such as what you will include in your portfolio
 and how you will categorize the content.
. Professional writing is a profession, and its health as a profession requires that it have advo-
  cates within both academic and workplace institutions. You can take on the role of an advo-
  cate in many ways, but one such way is by constructing new opportunities for professional
  writers.
  individually or in teams of three or four, find a local client who has intensive writing de-
  mands but who does not currently have a writing internship program. You may already have
  a few clients in mind, perhaps from previous work experience, experiences friends have had,
  or from a nonprofit organization with which you work. You can also use your instructor, in-
  structors who direct internships in any discipline, or a service learning director to help you lo-
  cate a client.
  Once you have located a client, work with that client to develop a plan for initiating a writing
  internship. Your course instructor will help you get a sense of what such a plan requires in
  terms of what work you will need to do (process) and what possible shapes the plan might
  take (product).
                                                                          madre
oe
                                                                                                  —
                                                  ape te                leesea ~
               ea, w=                  ant

          -_
                                ibe
                    -
  oboe

 pareon           pena                                            ;    int “cae          POET UFR 1
                                                                                                                       —
                                                                                                      tp poey
                                                                                                      A
                                                                                         atjee
                                                                        i


  :
                                                                                    =
                                   =             amen                                           bie elle ™
                                                                                                               ‘ols
                        a
  pa
   o  m
     si onah
                                    epe     e
                                       erenn7                             At
               Se               ee en
                             ee p                                                                        —-.
 Ce
                                                                                                    “
                                                                       e hn 9 on a Ee;      - tion      rr
 aetea Po
        a(=
           e  ANeegemeee
            a wr                                          ery otrm
                                                        Aaa
                                                       ie                     +          in ca
 Se a
                            ot sos Yes ol a  +vine op                                                             “a
Cid fied i emit Le + ewe e     e  e             eee
       i    9  t e v a t 4A               a e   ah
Cen gt    eranteh nt SR
                                        e
eter

i; aSEEGha eeeer
               Ga)                          A ty
                                        my fal
                                       oh      i Bal
                                                 | e   ea
                                                    Spee pand
                                                         so       ega el
                                                              ed‘elne
                                                            pea
                                                   ype
                                                 af 6s    ¢
               iat            65       o®
  oyaeet.                                                               ete eet =
                                             4    Sule pabeiicts ‘yt -~
         Lon@\ » “eres-Sp

                                                                           ieee Var,
                                                                         aspei             1m
                                                             orksOK.eh
                                                                     Sates
            “sow p
                                                     caglen af 2
                                                   © pens
                                                 ney
  =      ge pp
         am
         -    =
  hate Pop
                                                                        apt
                                                                      pes      a
                                                                          iaton— e gen
                                         ASWp             a
                   Tdse
                  (aa a  ic
                        el
   a?e? C®
                                       nome ms 1 Saget
  ie


     sh 5)her =a17, nr65= Hdl nfp   aaen
                                                                                        <u
                                                                           ees

  rate
                                             e                =
                              3 tanc
                                irmae st
                        ao
  ms   es Oc eS

  va



  Snet you Se           pes     Aly Oy i tee eam                           a ome al Nia
          ;                  en caved            RTA Gg
                INDE X
eearsecese




     Note to the reader: All text selection titles and author names are included in this index. Page
     ranges that follow selection index entries show the complete location of the selection. Boldfaced
     page ranges cover those selections in which key terms are called out by the author.




     Action                                                Automating, 341-355
BOOED
 HHSHHHREOHOHHOHHEOHERECH
 PORTE
       ethical implications of, 171
         written products as, 320
      “After Automation: Hypertext and Corporate           “Becoming a Rhetor: Developing Writing Ability
             Structures” (Johnson-Eilola and Selber),          in a Mature, Writing-Intensive
             341-359                                           Organization” (MacKinnon), 411-422
     Agent for change, 122-146                             Belles lettres, 104
     Alienated independence, 388-407                       Belletristic rhetoric, 11-19
     Alphanumeric mode, 271-284                            Bernhardt, Stephen A., “Shape of Text to Come,
     Anson, Chris M., “Moving Beyond the Academic              The: The Texture of Print on Screens,”
         Community: Transitional Stages in                     232-249
             Professional Writing,” 388-410                “Between Efficiency and Politics: Rhetoric and
     Aristotle                                                 Ethics in Technical Writing” (Ornatowski),
        audience and, 269                                       172-182
        Rhetoric, Book I: Rhetoric (excerpts), 20-37       Bureaucratic rationality, 172-181
        Rhetoric, Book VI: “Intellectual Virtue” in
           Nichomachean Ethics: The Chief Intellectual
           Virtues (excerpts), 37-40                       Caplan, Harry, (trans.), Rhetorica Ad Herennium
        on rhetoric as productive art and practice, 10,         (Cicero): Book I, Rhetorica Ad Herennium
           46                                                   (excerpts), 40-43
     Arrangement, 40-43                                    Change agent. See Agent for change
     Art, 20-36, 37-39. See also Productive art           Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Book I, “Rhetorica Ad
     Articulation, 341-355                                     Herennium” (excerpts), 40-43
     Articulation view, 80-96                             Classical rhetoric, 103-104
     Artifact, 287-316                                    Communications, and specific (rhetorical) situa-
     Artistic pisteis, 20-36                                   tions, 45-46
     Asymmetrical power, 360-379                          Communicative chains, 47-58
     Attenuated authentic participation, 423-439          Context(s)
     Audience(s). See also User-centered approach;          organizational, 267-268
             User-friendly approach                         of professional writing, 7
        in classical rhetoric, 103                          of technical writing, 220
       producing user-centered documents and, 269         Contraction, 341-355
     Authority, 122-146                                   Critical essay, usability of, 270
    -Authorship
       situational, 267-268
       technology and, 220                                Decode, 80-96


                                                                                                             443
Index


        Deliberation, 37-39, 202-216                     Fair use, 250-263
        Deliberative, 40-43                              Forsberg, L. Lee, “Moving Beyond the
        Deliberative rhetoric, 20-36, 183-200                 Academic Community: Transitional
        Delivery, 40-43                                       Stages in Professional Writing,” 388-410
        Demonstrative rhetoric, 20-36                    Foss, Karen A., “Perspectives on the Study of
        Design, iterative, 287-316                            Rhetoric,” 11-20
        Desktop publishing, 221-232                      Foss, Sonja K., “Perspectives on the Study of
        Dialectic, 20-36                                     Rhetoric,” 11-20
        Dias, Patrick, “Virtual Realities: Transitions   “Framing Postmodern Commitment and
              from University to Workplace Writing,”         Solidarity” (Porter), 202-217
              423-441                                    Freedman, Aviva, “Virtual Realities:
        Discourse community, 47-58                            Transitions from University to Workplace
        Division of labor model, 321-339                      Writing,” 423-441
        “Division of Labor or Integrated Teams: A        Functional mapping, 232-248
              Crux in the Management of Technical
              Communication?” (Killingsworth and
              Jones), 321-341                            Genres, 270
        Doak, Jeffrey, “Technical Communicator as           instructions as, 270
              Author: Meaning, Power, Authority,”        Grabill, Jeffrey T., “Toward a Critical Rhetoric
              80-96                                          of Risk Communication: Producing
        Document review (cycling), 104                       Citizens and the Role of Technical
        Documents                                            Communicators,” 360-382
           in school environments, 386                   Graphic mode, 271-284
           usability of, 269-270
           user-centered, 269-317
        Dominance, 360-379                               Heuristic, 202-216
        Driskill, Linda, “Understanding the Writing      High-level context, 411-422
              Context in Organizations,” 105-121         High visual intensity, 271-284
                                                         Howard, Tharon W., “Who ‘Owns’ Electronic
                                                              Text?”, 250-264
        Economies of scale, 221-232                      Hypertext, 341-355
        Education, in writing, 386-387                      organizational structures from, 320
        Elocutionary rhetoric, 11-19
        Encode, 80-96
        Epideictic, 40-43                                Individuation, 122-146
        Epistemic, writing as, 423-439                     Katz on, 104
        Epistemological rhetoric, 11-19                  Induction, 37-39
        Epistemology of objectivity, 183-200             Informating, 341-355
        “Ethic of Expediency, The: Classical Rhetoric,   Instructions
             Technology, and the Holocaust” (Katz),         usability of, 270
              183-202                                      writing of, 270
        Ethics, rhetoric/writing and, 171-217            Integrated teams model, 321-339
        Ethos, 20-36                                     Interactivity, 232-248
        Expansion, 341-355                               Intermediary readers, 146-167
        External sources of meaning, 105-119             Internal sources of meaning,
        Extra-textual level, 271-284                          105-119
                                                         Inter-textual level, 271-284
                                                         Intra-textual level, 271-284
        Facilitated performance, 423-439                 Invariable, the, 37-39
        Faigley, Lester, “Nonacademic Writing: The       Invent, 20-36
              Social Perspective,” 47-58                 Invention, 40-43, 71-77
                                                                                                  Index   445

Isolation. See Strategy of isolation             Mackinnon, Jamie, “Becoming a Rhetor:
Iterative design, 287-316                             Developing Writing Ability in a Mature,
                                                      Writing-Intensive Organization,” 411-422
                                                 Macro-level writing processes, 411-422
Johnson, Robert J., “When All Else Fails, Use    Magic bullet theory, 341-355
     the Instructions: Local Knowledge,          Means/ends, 183-200
     Negotiation, and the Construction of        Mediator, 80-96
     User-Centered Computer                      Medway, Peter, “Virtual Realities: Transitions
     Documentation,” 287-317                          from University to Workplace Writing,”
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan, “After Automation:          423-441
     Hypertext and Corporate Structures,”        Memory, 40-43
     341-359                                     Micro-level writing processes, 411-422
Jones, Betsy G., “Division of Labor or           Mid-level context, 411-422
     Integrated Teams: A Crux in the             Miller, Carolyn R., “What’s Practical About
     Management of Technical                          Technical Writing?”, 61-70
     Communication?”, 321-341                    Miller, David James, “Technical
Judicial, 40-43                                       Communicator as Author: Meaning,
Judicial rhetoric, 20-36                              Power, Authority,” 80-96
                                                 Modularity, 232-248
                                                 “Moving Beyond the Academic Community:
Kalmbach, James R., “Publishing Before                Transitional Stages in Professional
     Computers,” 221-232                             Writing” (Anson and Forsberg), 388-410
Katz, Steven B., “Ethic of Expediency, The:      Multiple audiences, 146-167
     Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and the
     Holocaust,” 183-202
Katz, Susan M., “Writing Review as an            Navigational strategies, 232-248
     Opportunity for Individuation,” 122-146     Negotiated approach, 360-379
Kennedy, George A. (trans.), Rhetoric            “Nonacademic Writing: The Social
     (Aristotle): Book I, Rhetoric (excerpts),       Perspective” (Faigley), 47-58
     20-37                                       Nonartistic pisteis, 20-36
Killingsworth, M. Jimmie, “Division of Labor
    or Integrated Teams: A Crux in the
    Management of Technical                      Oppression, 360-379
    Communication?”, 321-341                     Orality, 104, 146-167
Knowledge, as verb, 71-77                        “Orality and Literacy in the Workplace:
Kostelnick, Charles, “Systematic Approach to          Process- and Text-Based Strategies for
     Visual Language in Business                      Multiple-Audience Adaptation” (Spilka),
    Communication, A,” 271-286                        146-168
                                                 Organizational context, 267-268
                                                 Organizational ethos, 183-200
Lateral transfer, 388-407                        Organizational individuation, 122-146
Legitimate peripheral participation,             Organizationally situated authorship, 5-6
      423-439                                    Organizational situation, 103-104, 105-119
Letterpress, 221-232                             Ornatowski, Cezar M., “Between Efficiency
Limners, 250-263                                      and Politics: Rhetoric and Ethics in
Linear process, 321-339                               Technical Writing,” 172-182
Literacy, 146-167
Lithography, 221-232
Logos, 20-36                                     Paré, Anthony, “Virtual Realities: Transitions
Low-level context, 411-422                            from University to Workplace Writing,”
Low visual intensity, 271-284                         423-441
Index



        Participatory communication, 80-96               Receiver, 80-96
        Participatory democracy, 360-379                 Recursive process, 321-339
        Pathos, 20-36                                    Regli, Susan Harkness, “Whose Ideas? The
        Personal authority, 122-146                           Technical Writer’s Expertise in Inventio”
        “Perspectives on the Study of Rhetoric” (Foss,         (Regli), 71-77
             Foss, and Trapp), 11-20                     Relationships, social space and, 319-320
        Phronesis, 61-70, 202-216                        Resolution, 388-407
        Place, in classical rhetoric, 103                Rhetor. See Writer (rhetor)
        Poiesis, 61-70                                   Rhetoric, 202-216. See also Aristotle;
        Polis, 183-200                                       Professional writing
        Porter, James E., “Framing Postmodern              defined, 9-10
              Commitment and Solidarity,” 202-217          ethical implications of, 171-217
        Practical (high sense), 61-70                      “Excerpts from Book I, ‘Rhetorica Ad
        Practical (low sense), 61-70                         Herennium” (Cicero), 40-43
        Practical knowledge, 61-70                         historical perspective on, 10
        Practical wisdom, 37-39                            of interaction, 71-77
        Practice                                           meaning of rhetor (writer), 46
           vs. production, 3-4                             “Perspectives on the Study of Rhetoric”
           vs. theory, 2-3                                    (Foss, Foss, and Trapp), 11-20
        Praxis, 61-70                                      of persuasion, 71-77
        Product(s)                                         as productive art vs. practice, 46
          of professional writers, 268, 269                professional writing and, 7-8
          social practices and, 320                        relationship with professional writing,
        Production, vs. practice, 3-4                         45-46
        Productive art, professional writing as, 46,       relationship with specific communications
              267-268                                         situations, 45-46
        Productive knowledge, 61-70                      Rhetoric (Aristotle)
        Professional writing. See also Rhetoric             Book VI, “Intellectual Virtue” in
          contexts of, 7                                      Nichomachean Ethics: The Chief
          defined, 267                                        Intellectual Virtues (excerpts), 37-40
           “Nonacademic Writing: The Social                excerpts from Book I, 20-37
              Perspective” (Faigley), 47-60              “Rhetorica Ad Herennium” (excerpts from
           production and, 3-4                                Book I) (Cicero), 40-43
           products of, 268, 269                         Rhetorical canons, 11-19
           rhetoric and, 7-8, 45-46                      Rhetorical development, 411-422
           studying in school, 385, 386-441              Rhetorical situation, 45-46, 103, 105-119
           as technologically situated action, 219-264   Rhetoric/writing, 202-216
           “What's Practical About Technical             Risk, social understanding of, 320
              Writing?” (Miller), 61-71                  Ross, David (trans.), Rhetoric (Aristotle): Book
        Project management, writers’ roles in, 320            VI, “Intellectual Virtue” in Nichomachean
        Public domain, 250-263                                Ethics: The Chief Intellectual Virtues
        Publishing, as action, 221-232                        (excerpts), 37-40
        “Publishing Before Computers” (Kalmbach),
             221-232
                                                         Scaffolding, 423-439
                                                         School writing, professional writing and, 4-5,
        Readability, 287-316                                  385, 386-441
        Reader. See Audience(s)                          Science, 37-39
        Reading, task-oriented, 232-248                  Second sophistic, 11-19
                                                                                                   Index   447

Selber, Stuart A., “After Automation:          Target readers, 146-167
     Hypertext and Corporate Structures,”      Task-oriented reading, 232-248
     341-359              ;                    Task representation, 146-167
Selective emphasis, 172-181                    Taylorism, 321-339
Self-directed team, 321-339                    Techne, 61-70
Sender, 80-96                                  “Technical Communicator as Author:
Shannon-Weaver model, 105-119,                      Meaning, Power, Authority” (Slack,
     360-379                                        Miller, and Doak), 80-96
“Shape of Text to Come, The: The Texture of    Technical writing, context of, 220
     Print on Screens” (Bernhardt), 232-249    Technocratic approach, 360-379
Simmons, W. Michele, “Toward a Critical        Technology. See also Publishing
     Rhetoric of Risk Communication:             professional writing as technologically situat-
     Producing Citizens and the Role of             ed action and, 219-264
     Technical Communicators,” 360-382           as tool, 219
Site license, 250-263                            writing for, 3
Situational authority, 122-146                 Telos, 183-200
Situational authorship, 267-268                Text(s), 287-316. See also specific issues
Six parts of discourse, 40-43                     relationships produced by, 320
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, “Technical                 user-centered documents and, 269-317
     Communicator     as Author: Meaning,      Theoretical knowledge, 61-70
     Power, Authority,” 80-96                     vs. practice, 2-3
Social authority, 122-146                      Time, in classical rhetoric, 103
Social cognition, 411-422                      Topos/topoi, 20-36
Socialization, 122-146                         “Toward a Critical Rhetoric of Risk
Social motive, 423-439                               Communication: Producing Citizens and
Social practice                                      the Role of Technical Communicators”
   technology and, 219-220                           (Grabill and Simmons), 360-382
   writing as, 171-172                         Transition, from school to workplace, 385
Social space                                   Translation view, 80-96
   defined, 319-320                            Transmission view, 80-96
   text relationships with, 320                Trapp, Robert, “Perspectives on the Study of
Sophists, 11-19                                    Rhetoric,” 11-20
Spatial mode, 271-284                          Typography, 221-232
Speaker, in classical rhetoric, 103
Spilka, Rachel, “Orality and Literacy in the
     Workplace: Process- and Text-Based        “Understanding the Writing Context in
     Strategies for Multiple-Audience              Organizations” (Driskill), 105-121
     Adaptation,” 146-168                      Usability of documents, 269-270
Stationers’ Company, 250-263                   User-centered approach, 269-270, 287-316
Strategy of isolation, 146-167                   professional texts and, 267-268
Structural-functionalism, 105-119              User-friendly approach, 287-316
Style, 40-43, 104
Supra-textual level, 271-284
Syllogism, 37-39                               Variable, the, 37-39
Symbolic analyst, 360-379                      Vertical transfer, 388-407
“Systematic Approach to Visual Language in     “Virtual Realities: Transitions from University
     Business Communication, A”                    to Workplace Writing” (Dias, Freedman,
    (Kostelnick), 271-286                           Medway, Paré), 423-441
System-centered approach, 287-316              Virtue, 37-39
448   Index


              Visual signs, 271-284                          Writer (rhetot). See also Professional writing;
                                                                   Writing
                                                                meaning of term, 46
              Web authors, 3                                 Writing, 202-216. See also Professional writing;
              “What’s Practical About Technical Writing?”          Rhetoric/writing
                   (Miller), 61-70                              as epistemic, 423-439
              “When All Else Fails, Use the Instructions:      as instrumental, 105-119, 423-439
                  Local Knowledge, Negotiation, and the        organizational context of, 104
                  Construction of User-Centered Computer       as social act, 47-58
                  Documentation” (Johnson), 287-317            as social practice, 171-172
              “Who ‘Owns’ Electronic Text?” (Howard),          in workplace, 104
                  250-264                                    “Writing Review as an Opportunity for
              “Whose Ideas? The Technical Writer’s                Individuation” (Katz), 122-146
                  Expertise in Inventio” (Regli), 71-77
              Workplace writing, 3, 104
                school writing compared with, 4-5, 386-387   Xerography, 221-232
                                 :                =
       ee                     ee       ee
   7             Gas          ented               e   7
       a              <   =           122
  os             patie SWAP               =               7
            _    a,              7            h       7

Culp       eer            + © Oey
           =*)   Oa       earn       hn
      Professional Writing and Rhetoric
      Readings from the Field                          ,                                                                   ;
      Tim Peeples
                                                                                                                           }
Professional Writing and Rhetoric is a new collection of readings that introduces students to
professional writing by asking them to become active members in the ongoing conversations
of the field.
                                                                                                                       '

Advance Praise for Professighel Writing and Rhetoric                                                                   i
“Professional Writing and Rk:etoric is a distinctive book because the field really doesn't have a
good reader that draws froyn past writing of this quality with the kind of theoretical
underpinnings that this book has.”
                                                 Dale Sullivan, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

“This text is unique in its combining of research and theory from a range of fields likely to
affect the professional writer in the workplace. It does a great job of showing the importance
of rhetoric (and effective writers/communicators) in workplace settings.”
                                                           Patricia Wojahn, New Mexico State University

“[Mjost if not all of the essays are already well known and relatively central to the discipline.
 ... What makes these articles interesting and useful is theimseriousngss and their level of
scholarship and sophistication.”                              4        »         cr.
                                                           DO    NO      REMOVE           ile University


“Students will find most appealing, I think, the br                             |         netoric or
material related to rhetoric from a broad range of
                                                      Pé                                  ntral Florida
                                                            4111546      0000272150
“Professional Writing and Rhetoric complements the ‘practice’ BWks | ordinarily depend on,
and makes it possible for me to share my-own background knowledge (exemplified by
                                                                                     the
selections) with students who can no                                                       )




                                             il
                                                                 E5           PWR          /210        nh
                                                                    0-321-09975-3
Visit us on the Web at www.ablongr                              978-0-321-0997
                                                                                                       7245
                                                                               5-4     99990
                                             SS
                                                                                                  999)        ie
                                                                                                                   |




                                             =——                  9780321099754
                                             ==                       ve                 iyita
                                       Il
                                       WAIN
                                       IANA
                                        FORAGE
                                         AE
                                          nae
                                          in

Pearson
                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                               —_-—
                                      ‘oOa
 Education