Lesson 4, you'll learn ways to make your sentences clearer.
114   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                   115




                                               USE CLEAR LANGUAGE




INTRODUCTION

Language should convey your message swiftly and accurately. Some writers try to impress their
readers with unnecessarily complex language, which slows down and confuses readers more of-
ten than it impresses them.

Unnecessarily complex language can result in miscommunication, frustration, and wasted time.
The most effective and impressive writing makes complex ideas seem simple and clear.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write more professionally and effectively with these techniques:
            Using active language

            Using specific language
            Using plain English
            Avoiding jargon

Here is an e-mail written in language so vague, pompous, and passive that it's hard to tell what
the writer wants to say.

             Dear Ms. Carelli:

             This is in reference to your recent e-mail which has been received and
             forwarded to the appropriate department.

             Please be advised that your complaint will be prioritized immediately
             and you will be contacted when the nature of the difficulty has been
             ascertained. Action will then be taken in accordance with the facts.

             We regret this unfortunate occurrence. Please do not hesitate to con-
             tact this writer if further assistance is required.

             Sincerely,

             Joyce Ellensby
116   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Hard to follow, isn't it? Here’s what the writer may have meant.

              Dear Ms. Carelli:

             Thank you for your e-mail. | am sorry we have misplaced your loan
             documents, delaying your loan approval.

             James Nguyen manages our Research Department; searching for
             your documents is a high priority for his team. He will send me a re-
             port within three days.

              | will call you by next Friday with an update on your application’s
              status.

              Sincerely,

             Joyce Ellensby


The revised e-mail is more concise, even though it includes some new information. The new e-
mail also gets the message across more clearly because the writer used active, specific language,
with plain English instead of business jargon.
                                                                  LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   117




USE ACTIVE LANGUAGE

Passive language can weaken your writing, confuse your readers, and make your sentences lon-
ger. In contrast, active language focuses your readers’ attention and increases the impact of your
message.

As you can see in the following examples, in active language, the actor comes before the action.
To use active language, say who acts, not just what the action is. The actor is underlined in the
following revisions, and the action is boldfaced.

PASSIVE         The project was managed by John.

ACTIVE          John managed the project.
                (unnecessary words: “was” and “by”) (actor: John) (action: managed)


PASSIVE         The design document has been completed by the team.

ACTIVE          The team has completed the design document.


PASSIVE     A     safety plan was prepared and distributed to employees by the committee.

ACTIVE          The committee prepared a safety plan and distributed it to employees.

When you give instructions, it is particularly important to say clearly what you want your read-
ers to do. It can be frustrating and confusing to try to follow instructions that someone wrote in
passive language.

PASSIVE         The water should be measured every 35             Sone           ihe actor i s
              minutes.                                            sentence isimplied rather _
                                                                  than spelled out. For in-_
ACTIVE        The
              technician should measure the water ev-             stance,inthesentence
                ery 35 minutes.                                   “Prepare a safety plan? the
                                   oye                            implied subject is “you.” (Le.,
                                                                  “Tm asking or telling you
                [an implied you] Measure the water every 35       to prepare a safety plan.”)
              THINUtes.                                           The actor in a sentence isn’t
                                                                  always a person: “The plan —
These revisions make the passive language active by imply-        is flawed”; “The weather pre-
ing or stating an actor before the action. Either the techni-     vented us from going out”
cian or the reader—“you”— should measure the water.
118   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PASSIVE        The cover of the printer should be lifted, the ink cartridges that have been emp-
               tied should be removed, and the new ink cartridges should be opened, prepared,
               and inserted in the appropriate slots.

ACTIVE         [implied you] Lift the printer cover, remove the empty cartridges, open and pre-
               pare the new cartridges, and insert them into the appropriate slot.

In this revision, the implied actor—an implied “you,” or the reader—now appears before the ac-
tion of lifting the cover and removing the cartridges.

The next two examples also show how to revise a passive-language sentence by adding a missing
subject or actor.

PASSIVE        The door was found unlocked three times during the past month.

ACTIVE         The security guard found the door unlocked              See the Verbs section of
               three times during the past month.                      Lesson 5: Grammar
                                                                                       for
                                                                        a more complete discus-
PASSIVE _ It would be appreciated if the report could be                sion of passive and active _
          delivered to me on Monday.                                    language, including situ- _
                                                                        ations when passive lan- _
ACTIVE         | would appreciate it if you deliver the report to       guage may be —
               me on Monday.




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences so they are active, direct, and clear. The first step is to identify an actor.
(Feel free to invent one.)


      1. ‘The research project is being conducted by the News Department.
                                                            LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   119



2. A copy of the approval must be stapled to the request before it is forwarded to the
   Accounting Office.




3. The new design is attached for your review and its return by March 15 would be
   appreciated.




4.   An investigation will be conducted by Andrea Russo into the concern voiced by Mr.
     Szabo.




5.   Reservations for the conference can be made by telephoning Tom Woo at Extension
     4732 before December 1.
120    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like these; the more active, revised words are boldfaced
here. Make sure that the actor comes before the action in your revisions.

1: ORIGINAL            The research project is being conducted by the News Department.

      REVISION         The News Department is conducting the research project.


2: ORIGINAL            A copy of the approval must be stapled to the request before it is forwarded
                       to the Accounting Office.

      REVISION         You must staple a copy of the approval to the request before forwarding it to
                       the Accounting Office.


3: ORIGINAL            The new design is attached for your review and its return by March 15 would
                       be appreciated.

      REVISION          [an implied you] Please review the design and return it by March 15.


4: ORIGINAL            An investigation will be conducted by Andrea Russo into the concern voiced
                       by Mr. Szabo.

      REVISION         Mr. Szabo voiced a concern and Andrea Russo will investigate it.


5: ORIGINAL            Reservations for the conference can be made by telephoning Tom Woo at
                       Extension 4732 before December 1.

      REVISION         You can make reservations for the conference by telephoning Tom Woo at
                       Extension 4732 before December 1.
                                                        =OR=

      REVISION         [implied you] To make reservations for the conference, telephone Tom Woo
                       at Extension 4732 before December 1.
                                                                   LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   121




                                        Assignment

Do you use too much passive language when you write? Look through your own writing for
passive, indirect sentences. If you find any, write two of them below. Then revise the sentences
so they are active and direct. If you dont find any passive sentences, go on to the next section of
this lesson.

If youre not sure whether a sentence is passive or active, underline the actor and circle the ac-
tion. The language is passive if you cant find an actor (including an implied “you”) or if the actor
comes after the action.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
122   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




USE SPECIFIC LANGUAGE

Specific language makes your writing easier to read, while vague language paints an unclear pic-
ture. The more specific your language is, the less guesswork and effort your readers will need to
understand your message.

VAGUE          Some time ago, the building was destroyed in a disaster.

SPECIFIC       In 1994, fire destroyed the apartment house.


VAGUE          Our group went to Los Angeles for a meeting.


SPECIFIC       Our project team flew to Los Angeles to meet with Harriet Allen, the system
               designer.

VAGUE          Ask the client to complete the paperwork in a timely manner.

SPECIFIC       Ask the client to complete the new account application form within ten working
               days.

It can show consideration when you supply your readers with precise information. Vague lan-
guage can require them to guess at unknown meanings behind your word choices, so try using
words and phrases like the ones listed here to make your writing less vague and more specific.

               VAGUE                             SPECIFIC
               vehicle                           car
               car                               convertible
               equipment                         computer
               computer                          laptop
               went                              walked; ran; drove
               traveled                          flew; took the train; sailed
               contacted                         called; spoke to; visited
               proper                            correct; easy-to-use

               some                              five
               recently                          yesterday
               in a timely manner                by August 15; within two weeks
                                                                 LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   123




PRACTICE

Underline the vague, general words and phrases in these sentences. Then use your imagination
to fill in details and revise the sentences so they communicate specific, useful information.

    1. Recently, we looked at a structure that might be suitable for our needs.




    2. During the incident, Ms. Brown sustained multiple injuries to her upper torso and
       limbs.




    3. We have identified a few items to be discussed at the meeting, so please leave consider-
       able time in your schedule.
124    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are some possible revisions; yours will be different because you added different details. The
original boldfaced words are vague and imprecise; here are more concrete terms to replace them.


1: ORIGINAL            Recently, we looked at a structure that might be suitable for our needs.

      REVISION         Last week we looked at a four-story building that might be big enough for
                       our new machine polishers.




2: ORIGINAL            During the incident, Ms. Brown sustained multiple injuries to her upper
                       torso and limbs.

      REVISION         During the fall, Ms. Brown’s chest, shoulders, and arms were scratched and
                       cut.




3: ORIGINAL            We have identified a few items to be discussed at the meeting, so please leave
                       considerable time in your schedule.

      REVISION         At the meeting, we will discuss the next conference, the move to the new
                       building, and the new staff position, so please leave at least three hours in
                       your schedule.
                                                             LESSON   4.   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   125




                                     Assignment

Check your own writing to see whether you have used vague words and phrases. Underline any
words or phrases you find and write them below. Revise two of them to be more specific and
clear.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




 REVISION
126   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




USE PLAIN ENGLISH

Do you ever have to read something very slowly because the writer has used unnecessarily for-
mal language, or has used uncommon words when everyday words would have gotten the point
across?

Pompous language can confuse, intimidate, amuse, or annoy your readers. Plain English com-
municates your message more reliably. Stuffy words and phrases can force readers to men-
tally translate your writing into everyday language, which can waste valuable time and create
misunderstandings.

How long does it take for you to read this paragraph and understand it?

             Per your request, enclosed herewith are documents concerning the
             above-mentioned project. Please review said documents and return
             them to this office prior to January 15. We will then initiate the pro-
             cess of implementing the requested system modifications.


See how much easier the paragraph is to read when it’s written in plain English?

              As you asked, | am sending a description of the Acme project. Please
              read the description and send it back to me before January 15. We
              will then start the system modifications.


Pompous language does not improve communication; instead, it gets in the way of your mes-
sage. So use plain English when you write. Choose ordinary words that communicate your mes-
sage as simply and directly as possible.
                                                                 LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   127




PRACTICE

Sometimes, the words in this list are the best, most precise words to use. But writers often use
these words when simpler language would communicate more clearly. What ordinary words
or phrases would be good alternatives to the words listed here? Use a thesaurus or dictionary if
youre not sure.

   1.    prior to

  2.     subsequent to

   3.    utilize

   4.    modifications

   5.    enhance

   6.    beneficial

   7.    supplemental

   8.    magnitude

   9.    supersede

   10.   augment

   11.   heretofore

   12.   parameters

   13.   commence

   14.   endeavor

   15.   optimal

   16.   forthwith
128   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




Here are some possible replacement words. You may have different, equally correct answers.

         1.    prior to                  before
         2.    subsequent to             after; following
         x5    wlitilize                 use
         4.    modifications             changes
         5.    enhance                   improve
         6.    beneficial                helpful
         7.    supplemental              extra
         8.    magnitude                 size
         9.    supersede                 replace
         10.   augment                   increase; add to
         11.   heretofore                before; until now
         12.   parameters                boundaries; limits

         13.   commence                  begin; start
         14.   endeavor                  try
         15.   optimal                   best; most favorable
         16.   forthwith                 immediately
                                                                   LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   129




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences, using plain English and active language.

    1. Division managers are hereupon requested to facilitate the implementation of the afore-
       mentioned program by forwarding details of their personnel requirements.




    2. ‘The injuries sustained by the passengers during the accident were the result of their fail-
        ure to use the vehicle's restraining elements.




    3. Enclosed herewith is a heretofore-unseen listing of procedures that must be implement-
       ed by our team immediately.
130    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


Your revisions might look something like these.

1: ORIGINAL            Division managers are hereupon requested to facilitate the implementation
                       of the aforementioned program by forwarding details of their personnel re-
                        quirements.


      REVISION         Please help us get this program started by letting us know how many people
                       you need to complete the job.
                                                        = ORe=

                       To help us get this program off the ground, please send us a list of your divi-
                       sions personnel needs.




2: ORIGINAL            The injuries sustained by the passengers during the accident were the result
                       of their failure to use the vehicle's restraining elements.

      REVISION         The passengers were injured in the accident because they didn't use seat belts.




3: ORIGINAL             Enclosed herewith is a heretofore-unseen listing of procedures that must be
                        implemented by our team immediately.

      REVISION          Here is a list of new procedures that our team must implement immediately.
                                                        R=

                        Please begin using these procedures at once.
                                                             LESSON 4 USE CLEAR LANGUAGE   131




                                     Assignment

Look for examples of pompous language in your own writing. Underline any words or phrases
you find and write them below. Revise two of them, using plain English.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




 REVISION




                             Next, look at the importance of using
                        plain English instead of jargon when you write.
132    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




AVOID JARGON

Business writing is full of business jargon—words, phrases, abbreviations, and acronyms that
make sense only to people who are used to business language, or who share a particular job.

Sometimes businesspeople give new meanings to familiar words, and sometimes they invent
new jargon terms. Some of these terms enter mainstream language: bankers’ automated teller
machines from the 1970s are today’s ATMs. Networking is another business term that has be-
come widespread and very useful.

However, jargon damages business writing when it’s difficult or impossible for the reader to
understand. Use plain English instead of jargon when you write to someone who may not
recognize general business jargon, or terms that are specific to your job. Define any term that
may be new to your reader. Here are a few examples of business jargon that a reader might find
confusing:

          bullish on: confident of success in a given activity

          going forward: in the future

          push the envelope: to go beyond usual limits

          put a pin in it: “Hold that thought” or “Let’s come back to that later”

Here are three kinds of jargon you should usually avoid:

1.    Everyday words used in a nonstandard way:

          We plan a campaign to migrate customers to our bank.

2.    Words your reader wont find in a current dictionary:

          We hope to maximalize our marketing potential.

3.    Potentially unclear acronyms:

          Next year’s goals include increasing the BOCSE, establishing a RADIT, and improving
          the FAJ.
                                                                    LESSON   4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE   133




   tences could be partof an e-mail to a new intern in an office:
           Pd like you to read the attached request for proposal (RFP). Let’s discuss the
           RFP on Monday; after that, I’d like you to start writing a response to it.




PRACTICE

Look for examples of jargon in your own writing. If you find any, underline the words and then
write them below. Translate two of the jargon words into plain English.

JARGON




TRANSLATION




JARGON




TRANSLATION
134   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

To apply what you learned in this lesson, revise the following paragraphs so the language is ac-
tive, specific, and in plain English. Invent any details you like.

             Enclosed herewith is the information requested by you in your recent
             communication with the undersigned subsequent to your recent
             purchase of our computer system. It is our belief that the enhance-
             ments described therein would be beneficial to the efficiency of your
             organization by making it possible to increase the amount of data
             processed within a given time period.

             It is our policy to endeavor to provide the optimum service possible
             to our customers. Please be advised that should you have additional
             questions or concerns, every attempt will be made to provide a re-
             sponse in a timely manner.
                                                                   LESSON 4   USE CLEAR   LANGUAGE




ANSWER

Here is one way to revise the paragraphs. The details of your revision will differ.

             As you asked, | am sending a description of the improvements we
             plan to make to the Model 603A computer system you purchased
             from us last year. We believe these improvements will help your orga-
             nization process at least 15 percent more data each month.

             We try to provide the best possible service to our customers. Please
             let me know if you have any more questions or concerns, and | will do
             my best to address them within five working days.
136    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE    IT WELL   GUIDE




REVIEW

Fill in the blanks with the correct word or phrase. If you're not sure, check the page number after
the sentence.

      4,   Inactive laneuace, ites 2
                                  es                                 =       COMes HeLOTC
           (Gs                esis Ce at, Gly)

      2.                                          makes your writing easier to read, while vague language
           paints an unclear picture.        (122)

      3.   Pompous language can confuse, intimidate, amuse, or annoy your readers.
           communicates your message more reliably.                  (126)

      4.   Business writing is full of business __~=~—~=_—~~—~—~—S—S
                                                            SSC that is, words, phras-
           es, abbreviations, and acronyms that make sense only to people who are used to busi-
           ness language or who share a particular job. (132)




WHAT?’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've examined ways to use language to communicate more actively, simply, and
clearly. In Lesson 5, you'll learn how to ensure that your grammar is correct for any business
document you write.
                                                                                                  137




                                            USE CORRECT                       GRAMMAR


INTRODUCTION

American English can be difficult to write correctly because it doesn’t always follow clear-cut
rules. You might find differences between the advice in this book and another book’s advice, or
the rules you learned in school. That’s because many grammar and word-usage issues are not
matters of hard-and-fast rules, but of style. Throughout this workbook, you'll find widely ac-
cepted and easy-to-use style guidelines that are accepted in the workplace today.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write clearly and professionally with these strategies:
        m   Avoiding incomplete sentences and achieving parallel sentence structure
        m™ Using strategic parts of speech to write clear, correct, dynamic sentences
        m™ Recognizing the effects of passive and active language, and using them
           appropriately
        ™   Recognizing frequently misused words, and using them appropriately and
            confidently




INCOMPLETE        SENTENCES AND PARALLEL STRUCTURE

First, you'll learn how to avoid incomplete sentences and maintain parallel structure in a sen-
tence. These techniques make sure that each sentence you write communicates a complete
thought to a reader, and make sure that the reader grasps the logic of your message.
138   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




INCOMPLETE           SENTENCES


A complete sentence contains a subject and a verb, and it conveys at least one complete thought.

An incomplete sentence ends in a period, but the writer has omitted information that the reader
needs. Some incomplete sentences are missing a subject or verb, or both.

Circle the numbers in front of the incomplete sentences here.

      1. Always arrives on time.

      2. Because she is usually reliable.

      3. ‘The results of inaccurate accounting practices.

      4. Until after the final day of the conference.

You should have circled all the numbers. They are all incomplete sentences.

INCOMPLETE           A few hours.

COMPLETE              It will take a few hours.

Sometimes a complete sentence becomes incomplete when you add another word.

COMPLETE              Janine has returned from Chicago.

INCOMPLETE            Because Janine has returned from Chicago.

COMPLETE              We're happy because Janine has returned from Chicago.

Incomplete sentences like the middle example are often the re-
sult of a writer’s beginning a thought, becoming distracted, and   _ For more tips on com-_
forgetting to complete it. Proofreading your work will help you      plete versus incomplete :
catch unfinished thoughts and incomplete sentences like these.       sentences, see Lesson 7:
                                                                     Write Effective E-Mail,
                                                                     page 217.                  :
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   139




PARALLEL      STRUCTURE


To help your writing flow smoothly and make sense, use the same format for items you present
in a series. A series with items in different formats makes a sentence awkward to read. As the
reader scans through a series with parallel structure, the relationships between different pieces
of information are clear.

NOT PARALLEL          At the February meeting we will hold a discussion of the new health plan,
                      whether to revise the procedures manual, and then a draft will be devel-
                      oped of the early retirement policy.

PARALLEL              At the February meeting, we will discuss the new health plan, decide
                      whether to revise the procedures manual, and draft an early retirement
                      policy.

These parallel verb tenses save space and help guide the reader smoothly through the plans for
the February meeting.
140   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Underline structures in these sentences that either are parallel or should be parallel. If necessary,
rewrite the sentences.


      1. Rita’s responsibilities include sorting the mail, answering the phone, and to run errands.




      2. We have asked managers to reduce travel budgets by 20 percent and that expense re-
         ports should be submitted weekly.




      3. During my annual trip to Asia, I plan to visit our office in Japan, meet with officials in
         South Korea, look at possible manufacturing sites in China, and explore the possibility
         of setting up operations in Vietnam.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                              LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   141




ANSWERS


  The parallel words are underlined, and the revised words are in bold.

  1. Rita's responsibilities include sorting the mail, answering the phone, and running
     errands.



  2. We have asked managers to reduce travel budgets by 20 percent and to submit expense
     reports weekly.



  3.   (correct) During my annual trip to Asia, I planned to visit our office in Japan, meet with
       officials in South Korea, look at possible manufacturing sites in China, and explore the
       possibility of setting up operations in Vietnam.
142   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRONOUNS

These two kinds of pronoun mistakes are common in business writing:

         @   Unclear pronouns
         @   Gender-biased pronouns




UNCLEAR       PRONOUNS


As you can see from these examples, unclear pronouns quickly confuse readers.

UNCLEAR        When Marta met with Susan Garcia last week, she agreed to accept the revised
               proposal.

CLEAR          Susan Garcia agreed to accept the revised proposal when she met with Marta last
               week.

UNCLEAR        The transit officials plan to increase fares to reduce the annual deficit. This will be a
               hardship for commuters.

CLEAR          Transit officials plan to increase fares to reduce the annual deficit. This increase
               will be a hardship for commuters.

UNCLEAR        Toms shirt stopped fitting his waistline, so he had it taken in.

CLEAR          Tom had his shirt taken in to fit his waistline.
                                                                 LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   143




PRACTICE

See if you can clear up the confusing pronouns in these sentences. Feel free to guess the writer’s
meaning.

    1. The catalog had a picture of the work station the company needed, so Alex decided to
       buy it.




    2.     Ellen was unable to finish the project on time and explained the problem to Brandi. She
           was very frustrated.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
144    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




POSSIBLE REVISIONS


      1. Alex decided to buy the catalog because it had a picture of the work station the company
         needed.
                                                        SOR

           Because the company needed a work station, Alex decided to buy the one pictured in the
           catalog.




      2.   Ellen was unable to finish the project on time and explained the problem to Brandi.
           Brandi was very frustrated.
                                                        Sue

           Brandi was very frustrated when she learned Ellen was unable to finish the project on
           time.
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   145




GENDER-BIASED          PRONOUNS


In grammar, the term gender refers to the way a language categorizes words as feminine, mascu-
line, or neutral:
        m    She received her law degree in 1995.

        @    His ambition was to ride his bicycle across the country.

        m@   It's a beautiful building.

Until the late 1960s, it was common practice to use masculine pronouns—he, his, and him—to
refer to both women and men. Today, however, it’s no longer acceptable to use masculine pro-
nouns for groups that include women.

GENDER-       The administrative assistant asked everyone to select his preferred option by the
BIASED        first of next month.

The most effective way to remove gender bias is to revise the sentence, using plural nouns and
pronouns.

REVISED       The administrative assistant asked all employees to select their preferred options
              by the first of next month.
146     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      It has become more acceptable to use the plural pronouns their and them with singular
      indefinite pronouns such as everyone. But whenever you can, try to phrase sertenes> 8to
      avoid gender bias without using awkward constructions or clumsy grammar.

  AWKWARD                  The administrative assistant asked everyone to select higher preferred
                            health provider option by the first of next month.                     _

      AWKWARD              The administrative assistant asked everyone to select the health pro-
                           vider option s/he prefers by the first of next month. —

      CLUMSY               The administrative assistant asked everyone to select their preferred
      GRAMMAR              health provider option by the first of next month.

 - UNBIASED                The administrative assistant asked all of us to select our preferred
   AND CORRECT             health provider options by the first of next month.




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences to remove gender bias.

       1. This weekend, somebody left the lights on in his apartment.




       2. When compiling figures for the audit, an accountant should always make sure she has
          the most recent figures.




                                     Check your answers on the next page.
                                                              LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   147




ANSWERS


  1. Lights were left on in one apartment over the weekend.

                                         =O

     The lights stayed on in one apartment over the weekend.

  2. When compiling figures for the audit, accountants should always make sure they have
     the most recent figures.
148   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment
Review your own writing samples for unclear pronoun references or gender-biased pronouns. If
you find any, write the sentences below and then revise them. If you don't find any examples, go
on to the next section.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   149




SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT

It's sometimes hard to know whether to use the singular or the plural form of a verb. Circle the
numbers in front of the sentences that use correct verb tenses:

         Each of the systems are failing.

         Mr. Bruce and Mr. Appleby has received the e-mail.

         One of the calculators was advertised at a reduced price.

         The decision of the judges are final.

    5.   Neither of the clerks wants to change the hours.

    6.   Four dollars are not enough to buy us all coffee.

The verb tenses are correct in Sentences 3 and 5.


On the next few pages you'll find some of the basic rules that ensure subject-verb agreement in
your sentences.
150     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




A plural noun takes a singular verb when it conveys a single expression of time, money, or an-
other quantity. The subjects are underlined and the verbs are boldfaced in this lesson.

EXAMPLES                Ninety-nine cents isn’t much to pay for a song.

                         Three blocks feels like a long way to walk in some parts of this town.

                         Six hours is enough time for me to finish it.




It’s best to use a singular verb after these pronouns:

      anyone                                  everyone                      nothing
      anything                                everything                    one (of)
      each                                    neither                       some
      either                                  nobody                        somebody
      every                                   no one                        someone
      everybody                               none                          something


EXAMPLES                 One of the four systems is problematic.


                         Every agent, supervisor, and floor manager is needed.


                         No one wants to do the chore.


                         Somebody has to revise the protocols.
                                                                  LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   151




Two or more singular subjects joined by and take a plural verb.

EXAMPLE             Pencil and paper are required for the test.

When a noun is the subject of a sentence, the verb agrees with the noun—even if the subject is
followed by other nouns.

EXAMPLE           The use of BlackBerries and phones is prohibited during staff meetings.

In this example, the singular noun “use” is the subject of the sentence. It takes priority over
“BlackBerries and phones,’ and takes a single noun. If the subject of that sentence were plural, it
would take a plural verb.

EXAMPLE            Exits from the room to answer Blackberries and phones are prohibited during
                   staff meetings.

If youre struggling over what verb tense sounds best, then try rewriting the sentence. An
implied subject “you” agrees with the verb in this revised sentence: “Do not use phones or
BlackBerries during staff meetings.” This sentence is also much easier to understand than either
of the examples above.




When a noun is the subject of a sentence, the verb agrees with the noun—even when it’s fol-
lowed by other nouns and a phrase like as well as, along with, or in addition to.

EXAMPLE            Sheila, with the enthusiastic support of Roberta and Jim, plans to protest the
                   new restrictions.

In that case, Sheila is the subject of the sentence. The singular subject takes a singular verb.
152   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




The same rule applies to sentences with other words that come between the subject and the verb.

EXAMPLE              The largest building on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave.
                     intersect has always appealed to me.

In this case, “on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave. intersect” is as irrelevant
as Roberta and Jim’s enthusiastic support in the earlier sentence. The building has always ap-
pealed to the writer. The singular subject takes a singular verb no matter how many words pile
up in the space between.

If that sentence started, “The buildings,” plural, then the verb would be plural to match the plu-
ral buildings: “The buildings on the corner where Main St., Fourth St., and Second Ave. intersect
have always appealed to me.”




                           Practice subject-verb agreement on the next page.
                                                                    LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   153




PRACTICE

Underline the correct verb in each sentence.


    1.   The purpose of his requests (was, were) to get the additional funds.

    2.   I don't think either of the new designs (are, is) going to last for a year.

    3.   Each computer, desk, and printer (is, are) marked down

    4.   The cause of the errors (is, are) unknown.

         One of the reasons for absences (is, are) poor health.

         The largest of the three banks (is, are) in Petaluma.

         Everyone I asked, including the managers of both locations, (agree, agrees) with my
         decision.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
154    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. The purpose of his requests was to get the additional funds.

      2.   I dont think either of the new designs is going to last for a year.

      3.   Each computer, desk, and printer is marked down.

      4.   The cause of the errors is unknown.

      5.   One of the reasons for absences is poor health.

      6.   The largest of the three banks is in Petaluma.

      7.   Everyone I asked, including the managers of both locations, agrees with my decision.
                                                                 LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR      155



PASSIVE LANGUAGE AND HIDDEN VERBS

You learned in Lesson 4 how passive language can make your writing unclear. Many grammar
experts strongly condemn passive language, but many writers still use it. For most business writ-
ing, passive language will weaken your sentences and confuse your readers.

However, there are times when passive language is appropriate. This section gives you some
questions to ask as you decide when and whether to use it.

Active language propels a sentence forward by harnessing its verbs; in this section, you'll also
learn how to unlock verbs from passive language. Your sentences will become more clear, con-
cise, and energetic.




PASSIVE AND ACTIVE LANGUAGE


Passive language is sometimes acceptable. But whenever you use passive language, you should
do it consciously and carefully, and because it fits the sentence better than active language. Save
passive construction only for situations when the person or thing taking an action is unknown,
or not important.


Passive language often obscures who takes an action, while active language clearly reveals who
does what in a sentence. Sometimes a sentence names a person who takes an action, but the sen-
tence is still couched in passive language.




EXAMPLE       Thousands of dollars were saved for the company by Antoine's timely idea.

This sentence wastes space and downplays Antoine's accomplishment. Active language corrects
these problems.

REVISION      Antoine saved the company thousands of dollars with his timely idea.
156    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Sometimes a sentence implies who takes an action or holds an opinion, but the sentence is still
in passive language.

EXAMPLE         Jill explained that business suits are considered unnecessary in this office.

This writer implies that all the people who work in the office recognize a shared rule about ap-
propriate office clothes. It may be unimportant who holds this view. Nevertheless, the sentence is
simpler and stronger in the active voice:

REVISED _ Jill explained that no one considers business suits necessary in this office.




PRACTICE




Examine the passive language in the following sentences. Revise them, feeling free to add details,
if you think active language would improve the sentences. Underline the action, and who takes
the action.




      1.   Safety regulations had not been observed by the setup crew.


      2.   The document was hyphenated automatically.


      3.   Sales declined that quarter, as they were expected to do.




                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                                LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR   157



ANSWERS


  1. The setup crew had not observed safety regulations.

  2.   The document was hyphenated automatically. (fine as it is, since a computer takes the
       action)

  3.   Sales declined that quarter, as analysts had expected.




           Turn the page to learn other ways to make your language more active.
158   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




VERBS     FROZEN       IN NOUN         FORMS


Passive constructions often freeze the real action of a sentence behind a noun and two unneces-
sary, passive verbs. In these cases, it saves space and improves the sentence to translate the ac-
tion from a noun into a verb.


EXAMPLE        ‘The suggestion was made that we go.


REVISION       Vikram suggested that we go.




The passive verb “was made” adds unnecessary bulk to the sentence, and the verb to make
doesn't represent the most important action. By examining the noun “suggestion” you can find
another, implied verb and the sentence’s real action: to suggest.




Sentences can be written in active language, but still contain verbs frozen in noun forms. These
sentences often feature stale, everyday verbs like “to be” that don't represent the sentences’ real
action. Sometimes an -ing noun form of a verb slows these sentences down.

EXAMPLE        Her singing is amazingly good.

REVISION       She sings amazingly well.




This revision replaces the stale verb “is” with the more interesting verb “sings.” The new sentence
is crisper because the words “She sings” identify the actor and action much more simply and en-
ergetically than the words “Her singing is... -            »
                                                               LESSON 5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR      159



PRACTICE

Practice releasing verbs from noun forms in the following exercise. Feel free to add words and
ideas to rewrite the sentences to be shorter and more direct.

    1. Our preference is that you act immediately.




    2. Eating, drinking, and smoking are prohibited on all transit vehicles.




    3. The demonstration of project-management skills is a requirement for all applicants.




                             Check your answers on the next page.
160   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. We prefer that you act immediately.

      2. You may not eat, drink, or smoke on transit vehicles.

      3. We require that all applicants demonstrate project-management skills.
                                                   =OR=

         All applicants must demonstrate project-management skills.
                                                                   LESSON   5 USE CORRECT GRAMMAR   161




FREQUENTLY MISUSED WORDS

Many English words sound alike but have different meanings and spellings, which sometimes
makes it hard to avoid misusing words. Here are two methods that can help you use the right
words:
        ™   Rewrite the sentence, using a word that’s easier to recognize
        ™   Memorize the differences between similar-sounding words

USE A DIFFERENT        WORD


Try rewriting the sentence below with a word that isn’t as easy to confuse with a similar word.

            Nick met with his supervisor for (advise / advice) about ways to han-
            dle a troublesome customer.


The right word is advice, but you could also use suggestions.

            Nick met with his supervisor for suggestions about ways to handle a
            troublesome customer.


MEMORIZE      THE DIFFERENCES               BETWEEN   SIMILAR-SOUNDING            WORDS


Here are some pairs of useful word that people often confuse because they look or sound similar.
Memorizing the differences between them will give you more options when you write.

                       accept / except                     lead / led
                       access / excess                    loose / lose
                       advice / advise                  maybe / may be
                        affect / effect               personal / personnel
                     already/ all ready               principal / principle
                       choose / chose                     than / then

                      cite / sight / site

Also, alright has its own entry in Merriam-Webster’s Eleventh Collegiate Dictionary, but you
should always spell it as two words: all right. Many readers will assume you made a spelling mis-
take if you use the one-word form.
162     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      You cant count on your spell-check or grammar- check features to catch misused words. In /
      fact, these easily mistaken words often crop up as errors in newspapers ¢and on news sites
      that rely on computers instead of human proofreaders.


On the following pages are definitions and some mnemonic devices to help you remember
which word to use for a given situation.
                                                                  LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   163




accept / except

  We accept your offer with great pleasure.          verb: to receive or to agree

   Sandy is good at everything                       other than
   except totaling the figures.


TO REMEMBER:         Accept and agree both start with a.



access / excess

   The new road gives us access to our               way of getting to
   property.

   This pass guarantees access to                    permission to enter
   the concert.

   The new attorney has an excess                    too much
   of energy.

TO REMEMBER:         The “ex” in excess sounds like extra.



advice / advise

   I'd appreciate your advice about which            noun: recommendation, help
   system to purchase.


   We were called in to advise the company           verb: to give advice
   about ways to trim the budget.




affect / effect

   The delay will not affect our ability to meet     verb: to change
   the deadline.

   One effect of the fire was that                   noun: a result
   we lost five years’ worth of records.
164     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




already / all ready
      The game is already over.                                    before a given time

      The drivers are all ready to leave.                          all prepared


           As a separate word, all refers to several people or objects. If you can place a noun between
           all and ready, as in the sentence “All the drivers are ready to leave,’ use the two separate
           words—all ready—rather than the single word already.



alright / all right

      “The first two years of medical school were                  a highly controversial spelling
      alright.” —Gertrude Stein
      That was a nasty fall: are you all right?                    the unarguably correct
                                                                   spelling

           In short, alright’s wrong. All right is two words.



choose / chose

      Each department can choose the colors for                    present or future tense of the
      its own offices.                                             verb to choose
      We chose Honolulu as the site of its next                    past tense of the verb to
      meeting.                                                     choose
                                                                     LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   165




cite / sight / site


   The attorney cited similar cases.                  verb: to quote or refer to

   She travels because she loves                      noun: something seen
   each new sight.

   The new jail will be built on the site.            noun: location, piece of land,
                                                      place on the Web


TO REMEMBER:

          @    Cite is from the word citation.

          m    Sight is spelled like light. Both words refer to something you can see.



lead / led

   Be sure to place a lead apron on the                noun: metal
   patient's lap for X-rays.

   The facilitator led the discussion.                past tense of the verb to lead

   Do they lead the discussions?                      present or future tense of the
                                                      verb to lead


loose / lose

   Please put your loose change into                  not contained
   the coffee fund.

   The wheel wobbles because it is loose.             not securely attached

   Unfortunately, we continue to lose                 verb: to have fewer, or to have
   customers.                                         less


TO REMEMBER: Lost is the past tense of lose—only the final letter changes.
166     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




maybe / may be

      Maybe we should talk again on Thursday.                        perhaps

      This may be our last chance to change the                      verb: is possibly
      logo on our cards.


TO REMEMBER:

           =   Maybe is one word when youre uncertain about something.
           m   Use may be as two words when you could add the word well between them: “This
               may well be our last chance.”



personal / personnel

      Benefits include one day of personal time                      belonging to an individual
      every four months.

      All newly hired personnel are required                         employees
      to attend an orientation meeting.

TO REMEMBER:             Personnel has the same e as employees.



principal / principle

      Tomas is our first choice for school                           chief, head
      principal.

      The principal reason for her dismissal was                     primary, most important
      her high rate of absenteeism.

      He has paid off the principal and the interest             a financial term
      from the mortgage.



      Because of her principles, she would not                       rules of conduct
      approve the illegal use of funds.
                                                                    LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   167




TO REMEMBER:

        m =A pal and a principal are two kinds of people.
        m     =~Principle ends with e; ethics begins with e.



than / then

  After accepting congratulations                    at that time
  for his sales record, Isaac then graciously
  thanked his associates.

  Anik can complete her statistical assessments      the word sets up a
  faster than anyone else in the department.         comparison

TO REMEMBER:        Then is spelled like when, and both words refer to time.




  For brief, enjoyable tips on grammar and word usage, look up Mignon Fogarty’s Grammar
  Girl podcast. You can also read and play episodes on her website at grammar.quickand-
   dirtytips.com. Her topics include the distinctions between lay and lie; assure, ensure, and
 _ insure; will and shall; and who and whom. She also covers issues like “How to Write a
  Great Blog Comment.”                                               .




                                 Turn the page for some practice.
168    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Circle the correct word or words to complete each sentence.

      1.   Ifall goes well, next year’s budget will include funds for a significant increase in the
           number of employees in the (personal / personnel) department.

      2.   Everyone on the team believes that Davida is a more competent administrator (then /
           than) Eugene is.

      3.   ‘The small (principal / principle) sum accrues little interest.

      4.   The drop in the stock market will have no (affect / effect) on our plans for expansion.

      5.   Weare (already / all ready) two months late with our loan payment.

      6.   He has a tendency to ask for too much (advise / advice).

      7.   Earlier, she (led / lead) the dog out into the yard.

      8.   The inspectors found that the safety rules were far too (lose / loose).

      9.   Her test performance was (alright / all right).




                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                               LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR   169




ANSWERS


  1. Ifall goes well, next year’s budget will include funds for a significant increase in the
     number of employees in the personnel department.

  2.   Everyone on the team believes that Davida is a more competent administrator than
       Eugene is.

  3.   The small principal sum accrues little interest.

  4.   ‘The drop in the stock market will have no effect on our plans for expansion.

  5.   Weare already two months late with our loan payment.

  6.   He has a tendency to ask for too much advice.

  7.   Earlier, she led the dog out into the yard.

  8.   The inspectors found that the safety rules were far too loose.

  9.   Her test performance was all right.
170   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment

Review your own writing sample for any subject-verb agreement errors and misused words. Use
the space below to revise any incorrect sentences.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   5   USE CORRECT   GRAMMAR    171




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

    1.   Acomplete sentence containsa_______anda_______, and it conveys at least
         ONG =
             ae              (138)

    2.   A plural noun takes a ________ verb tense when it conveys a single expression of
         time, money, or another quantity. (150)

    3.   Two or more singular subjects joined by and takea _________verb.             (151)

    4.   _________ language often obscures who takes an action, while ____                 language
         clearly reveals who does what ina sentence.    (155)

    5.   the spelling alright is__-
                                 - ___- correct.       (164)




WHAT?’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've learned how to ensure that your grammar is correct for any business docu-
ment you write. In Lesson 6, you'll learn the correct uses of various punctuation marks.
172   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                173




                                   USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION


INTRODUCTION

Punctuation mistakes distract your readers and reduce your credibility. No workbook can offer
comprehensive coverage of punctuation in the American workplace: our language is too com-
plex, and it changes too quickly. Nevertheless, this lesson will help you review punctuation rules
that many business writers neglect.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write clearly and professionally with these guidelines:
        m@ Using punctuation marks to correct run-on sentences
        m™ Using strategic punctuation marks correctly
174   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PUNCTUATION AND RUN-ON SENTENCES

To start with a grammar term, a clause is any set of words within a sentence that contains its
own subject and predicate. Clauses are the building blocks of correct and incorrect sentences,
including run-on sentences.

See if you can underline the final clauses here:

              | got the job through Ms. Bucholz, who is a family friend.

              | remember that he joined the firm in September.


You recognized the final clauses if you underlined “who is a family friend” and “that he joined
the firm in September.”

A run-on sentence contains two or more clauses that are connected incorrectly. The clauses lack
one of the following, necessary links:
         ™   A conjunction such as and, or, but, because (etc.)

                                  —AND/OR—

         m   ‘The right punctuation

Run-on sentences are not necessarily long, and some run-on sentences have no punctuation at
all. (An example might be “Arrive on time leave on time.)


Here are two other kinds of run-on sentences:

      1. Two complete sentences joined only with a comma:

             The office will not be open over the holiday, please complete all
             important work by the day before.

      2. Two complete sentences joined only with a comma and a word like however, therefore,
         or meanwhile:

             The office will not be open over the holiday, therefore please complete
             all important work by the day before.
                                                                LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION




Here are four ways to correct a run-on sentence:

    1. Usea    period to divide the sentence into two or more new sentences:

              The office will not be open over the holiday. Please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    2.   Use acomma and a conjunction such as and, or, but, because, etc.:

              The office will not be open over the holiday, so please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    3.   Useasemicolon on its own:

              The office will not be open over the holiday; please complete all
              important work by the day before.

    4.   Useasemicolon and a word such as however, therefore, meanwhile, also, etc.:

              The office will not be open over the holiday; therefore, please
              complete all important work by the day before.
176   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Identify the run-on sentences below, and put an X beside them. Then use any of the methods
explained earlier to correct them.


                                                                        RUN-ON?
ORIGINAL        We met for six hours, however, we could not
                reach a consensus.
                                                                            x
REVISION        We met for six hours; however, we could not
                reach a consensus.


      1. The agency completed the investigation last month; its
         findings were inconclusive.


      2. We believe the problem is separate, it is not related to
         the earlier fire.


      3.   She has received the most up-to-date treatment, her
           depression hinders her recovery.




      4.   Let me know if you would like to meet with our team;
           meanwhile, we will proceed with the project.




      5. We had hoped to make a decision by now, however,
         we are still waiting for information from the client.
                                                          LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION




ANSWERS                                                                       RUN-ON?


     The agency completed the investigation last month; its
     findings were inconclusive.


     We believe the problem is separate; it is not related to
     the earlier fire.                                                     esas Kes

     She has received the most up-to-date-treatment, but
     her recovery is hindered by her depression.




     Let me know if you would like to meet with our team;
     meanwhile, we will proceed with the project.




     We had hoped to make a decision by now; however,
     we are still waiting for information from the client.
178   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                 Assignment
Check your own writing samples for run-on sentences. If you find any, write the originals and
revisions here. If you dontt find any, go on to the next section of this lesson.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   179




SENTENCES THAT ARE TOO LONG

Some sentences are too long to comprehend easily in one reading. Studies show that people gen-
erally have to read sentences of more than 28-30 words at least twice.

How many times do you have to read this sentence?

            To help Debra succeed in her present position, we recommend that
            she be given the opportunity to participate with the department su-
            pervisor, in meetings to be held twice a month starting in the first
            quarter of next year, with the specific purpose of discussing alterna-
            tive work methods for processing work flow. (51)


See how much easier these shorter sentences are to follow?

            To help Debra succeed in her present position, we recommend that
            she be given the opportunity to participate in meetings with the de-
            partment supervisor. (24) These meetings will be held twice a month
            starting in the first quarter of next year. (16) During these meetings,
            Debra and her supervisor can discuss alternative methods for pro-
            cessing work flow. (15)


As a general rule, keep the average length of your sentences to 17-24 words, with only one or
two thoughts per sentence. If you are using technical or unusual terms, drop the count to 15-18
words.

Here’s how to determine if your sentences are too long:
        ™   Count the number of words in each of five consecutive sentences. Include small
            words such as 4a, the, to, etc.

        ™   Divide the total by five.

            EXAMPLE

            The Data Processing Group has failed to meet its schedules for the
            past six months, causing delays and confusion throughout the or-
            ganization. (22) To remedy this situation, please make sure all team
            members follow the Data Processing Organizational Plan procedures
            to the letter. (20)


            The Plan, which was distributed to all the teams in November, clearly
            establishes objectives and priorities for all department projects. (20)
            The procedures it contains explain each team member's responsibili-
            ties in detail. (11) The procedures also provide steps to take in the
            case of problems. (12)
180    PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are the word counts for those five sentences:

           Words per sentence: 22 + 20+ 20+ 11+ 12=85

           Average words per sentence: 85 + 5 = 17


Now look at one of your writing samples. Count the number of words in each of five consecutive
sentences.
           ®   Write down the number of words in each sentence:

               Sentence 1:____————              Sentence 4:

               Sentence 2:_________—~—«CSenttence 5:

               Sentence 3:

           @   Add the five numbers and write the total:

           @   Divide the total by five and write that number:

If the average number of words per sentence is more than 25, pay closer attention to the length
of your sentences.

Here is an easy, two-step method for revising a long sentence:

      1.   List the ideas.

      2.   Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
           sentences.
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   181




Here's an example of a long sentence. Use the method listed on the previous page to revise it.

            | worked with a number of managers and supervisors to explore the
            issues which surfaced during the change process, including concerns
            about their own limitations, a sense of loss as a result of change,
            reconciliation of conflicting needs and priorities, and how to preserve
            their own sense of worth when everyone else seems to be moving
            forward. (57)




Your two-step revision might look like this:

    1. List the ideas.

            | worked with managers and supervisors to explore the issues
            resulting from changes. The issues included

            ¢   Concerns about their limitations

            e   Sense of loss as a result of change

            ¢   Concerns about conflicting needs and priorities

            e   Ways to preserve their sense of self-worth

    2. Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
        sentences.


            | worked with a number of managers and supervisors to explore the
            issues that surfaced during the change process. (19)

            Two of the major issues concerned feelings about their own limita-
            tions and their sense of loss as a result of change. (21) In addition,
            they wanted to reconcile their conflicting needs and priorities. (11)
            Finally, they are working to preserve their own sense of self-worth
            when everyone else seems to be moving forward. (19)




                                      Now try some practice.
182   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Revise this 55-word sentence into several shorter ones.

               | have enclosed a survey form that will allow you to give me feedback
               about the process used to set up the display booth that will help us
               learn whether our customers were satisfied with the arrangements
               and if they were not, we want to know what specific changes we
               should make for next year.

      1.   List the ideas.




      2.   Write separate sentences containing only one or two ideas. Use transitions to link the
           sentences.




                                   Turn the page to check your revision.
                                                            LESSON 6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   183




Once you've listed the ideas and written out separate sentences for them, your revision should
look something like this. Word counts are noted in parentheses.

            | have enclosed a survey form that will allow you to give me feedback
            about the process used to set up the display booth. (25) Your feed-
            back will help us learn whether our customers were satisfied with the
            arrangements. (14) If they were not satisfied, we want to know what
            specific changes we should make for next year. (18)




                                        Assignment

Review your own writing. Look for a sentence that is more than 24 words long. Write the origi-
nal and the revision here. (If you don't find any, go on to the next section of this lesson.)

ORIGINAL




REVISION
184   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




COMMAS

We'll review four situations when you must use a comma:
         1.   To set off a clause that does not change the meaning of a sentence
              In some dates and addresses
              To prevent misunderstanding

        ee!
          For items in a series


1. COMMAS       AND     CLAUSES


A clause is set off with commas if it could be removed without changing the meaning of the sen-
tence. That rule can be restated in two ways.

First, do not set off a clause with commas if removing the clause would change the meaning of
the sentence.

         WITH CLAUSE                    Cars that have faulty brakes are a menace.


         WITHOUT        CLAUSE          Cars are a menace.


Without the clause “that have faulty brakes,” the sentence has a different meaning. Therefore, it
would be incorrect to surround the clause with commas.

Second, use commas to set off a clause that does not affect the meaning of the sentence.


         WITH CLAUSE                    Dave's mother, who is 57, is visiting him in July.

         WITHOUT CLAUSE                 Dave's mother is visiting him in July.

In this example, removing the clause “who is 57” does not change the essential meaning of the
sentence. The age of Dave's mother is irrelevant to the fact that she’s visiting in July. The clause
stating her age is therefore set off with commas.




                               On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                            LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   185




PRACTICE

Underline the clauses in these sentences. Then insert commas to set off clauses that don't change
the meaning of the sentence.

    1. Her e-mail which I received yesterday stated very clearly that the work was to be com-
       pleted by next month.

    2.   Activities of our company that are directly related to this program are developed by the
         Processing Division.

    3. Engineers who are new to this procedure should not try to carry it out themselves.

    4,   The report which was written by hand was submitted on time.




                              Check your answers on the next page.
186   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWERS

      1. Her e-mail, which I received yesterday, stated very clearly that the work was to be
         completed by next month.

      2. Activities of our company that are directly related to this program are developed by the
         Processing Division.

      3. Engineers who are new to this procedure should not try to carry it out themselves.

      4, The report, which was written by hand, was submitted on time.




2. COMMAS       IN DATES AND ADDRESSES


In sentences, use commas to set off the year after a day of the month, and the town and state in
an address. In addresses and dates, it’s often necessary to use commas in pairs.

         INCORRECT           She lived at 186 Elm Lane Hibbing Minnesota.

         CORRECT             She lived at 186 Elm Lane, Hibbing, Minnesota.




         INCORRECT           January 1 1988 was the date of the great flood.

         CORRECT             January 1, 1988, was the date of the great flood.




When the date consists only of the month and year, omit the comma after the month.

         He retired in June 2004.


         The magazine was dated April 1996.




                             On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   187




PRACTICE

Add commas where they’re necessary.

    1. When the client died on September 28 2007 his policy was still pending.




    2. We inspected the property at 230 Clark Street Novato and found that an illegal unit had
       been constructed.




    3. She has been with the company since July 2000.



                            Check your answers on the next page.
188   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWERS

      1. When the client died on September 28, 2007, his policy was still pending.




      2. We inspected the property at 230 Clark Street, Novato, and found that an illegal unit

         had been constructed.




      3. She has been with the company since July 2000. [correct: no comma is necessary between
         the month and the year]
                                                            LESSON 6    USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION   189




3. COMMAS     THAT PREVENT       MISUNDERSTANDING

Some sentences sound clear in a writer’s mind, but could confuse the reader. Commas are in-
valuable, multipurpose tools to make your meaning clear by showing the reader how you pace
your thoughts.

A reader would probably be confused by the unpunctuated, rapid-paced sentences below. In
each case, a comma easily clears up the confusion by showing the reader where to pause be-
tween ideas.

        CONFUSING       Although there were jobs for a hundred thousands applied.


        CLEAR           Although there were jobs for a hundred, thousands applied.




        CONFUSING       In brief the report will take about an hour.

        CLEAR           In brief, the report will take about an hour.




                               Turn the page for some practice.
190   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Insert commas where you think they're necessary.

         ORIGINAL        After all the time he has taken has been well spent.

         REVISION        After all, the time he has taken has been well spent.



      1. As you know nothing changed as a result of the investigation.



      2. Ifyou want to swim the pool is a block away.



      3. To summarize case histories are the most important documents in our files.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                               LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   191




ANSWERS

    1. As you know, nothing changed as a result of the investigation.

    2.   Ifyou want to swim, the pool is a block away.

    3.   ‘To summarize, case histories are the most important documents in our files.


4. THE SERIES COMMA


Finally, without commas, three or more items in a series can run into one another. The result can
be confusing.

             Alphonse’s first assignments will be to clean the shelves move the
             filing cabinets put the books in alphabetical order and take the out-
             dated files to the warehouse.


Commas make it clear that each item in the series—in this case, four activities—is separate.

             Alphonse’s first assignments will be to clean the shelves, move the
             filing cabinets, put the books in alphabetical order, and take the out-
             dated files to the warehouse.


“Red, white, and blue” is an example of three items in a series. The most common conjunctions
for items in a series are the words and and or.


One of the most common punctuation questions is whether to use a comma before the final
conjunction in a series of three or more items. This punctuation is sometimes called the series
comma. In fact, there is no hard-and-fast rule about including or omitting the series comma.

         WITHOUT      SERIES        The store has the shirt in red, blue, green and yellow.
         COMMA


         WITH SERIES                The store has the shirt in red, blue, green, and yellow.
         COMMA
192    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




In most situations, you can use the series comma or omit it, as long as you consistently use it or
omit it throughout your entire document. But you must use the series comma whenever a sen-
tence would be confusing without it.

          WITHOUT        SERIES            The tasks our group must complete by next Wednesday
          COMMA                            include editing the brochure, preparing the mailing list and
          (CONFUSING AND                   printing the labels and printing and mailing the brochures.
          INCORRECT)

          WITH SERIES                      The tasks our group must complete by next Wednesday
          COMMA                            include editing the brochure, preparing the mailing list and
          (CLEAR AND                      printing the labels, and printing and mailing the brochures.
          CORRECT)

The series comma always goes before the conjunction, and never after it.

          INCORRECT                        Send the company treasurer your last three pay stubs, a
                                           copy of your federal tax return and, copies of any form
                                           1099s you might have received.

          CORRECT                          Send the company treasurer your last three pay stubs, a
                                           copy of your federal tax return, and copies of any form
                                           1099s you might have received.




      SOME ORGANIZATIONS HAVE RULES ABOUT COMMA USAGE.                      If your organization
      doesn't have this kind of rule, we recommend always using the series comma before the _
      conjunction. Then you'll never have to ask yourself whether the comma will prevent con- _
      fusion, and you'll never be wrong.



                            Before practicing the use of commas in a series,
                            take a look at the use of semicolons and colons.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   193




SEMICOLONS AND COLONS

Like commas, semicolons can separate items in a series. Semicolons and colons also indicate dif-
ferent kinds of transitions within a sentence from one clause to another.


SEMICOLONS


Here are three situations when youd use a semicolon.
        1.   To separate a series of items that already contain one or more commas:
                      Four people were unable to attend the meeting: Joe Masumoto, the club
                      treasurer, Keira Jones; Louise Boswarty the club president} and José
                      Rodriguez.
        2.   To join two unrelated clauses when you don’t want to use a conjunction such as
             and, but, etc.:
                      They agreed to select the lowest bidders they had to wait ten days for the
                      results.
        3.   To join two clauses with a word like therefore, however, etc., plus a comma:
                      We expected the report the first week of June} however, the project man-
                      ager has asked for a two-week delay.

COLONS


Next, we'll look at the three most common uses for colons in business writing.

        1.   Useacolon after the salutation of a formal business letter:
                      Dear Ms. Young.

        2.   Useacolon to introduce a series of items or a bulleted list after a word or phrase
             like the following:
                      The additional materials are as follows.

                              « business newspapers
                              ¢ trade magazines
                              e instructional DVDs

                              ¢ more computers

        3.   Use acolon to introduce a series after a stated or implied number:
                      There are three things you must know about your new job. starting hours,
                      ending hours, and vacations.
194    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                 SIDE-BY-SIDE PUNCTUATION MARKS


      Here are some guidelines for how punctuation marks appear beside other punctuation
      marks in American English.
             &   Don't put two periods side by side: use only one period for a sentence that
                 ends with an abbreviation.

                         We'll need to take a change of clothes, something to
                         read, snacks, etc.

                         | consulted Susan Leung, M.D.

             m@ ‘Tuck commas and periods inside quotation marks. Put colons and semico-
                 lons outside quotation marks.

                         Their supervisor reminded them, “It’s important to be on
                         time.” This reminder was unnecessary.

                         Their supervisor reminded them, “It’s important to be on
                         time”; this reminder was unnecessary.




      On the next page you'll find some practice involving commas, semicolons, and colons.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   195




PRACTICE

Add colons, semicolons, or commas where they’re necessary.


    1. The doctor said the condition has three symptoms itching hunger and thirst.



    2. ‘There are three new team members Erin Copland pitcher Jennifer Steinblum catcher
       and Pat Jonas shortstop.



    3. ‘The boys walked home from practice their coach had left earlier.



    4. I find the Sherwood proposition very appealing however Id like to know more about the
        product before continuing.



    5. She explained that the outbound train is delayed the news couldn't have been more
       unwelcome.




                             Turn the page to check your answers.
196   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING    SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1. The doctor said the condition has three symptoms. itching hungery and thirst.



      2. There are three new team members: Erin Copland, pitcher Jennifer Steinblum, catch-
           ery and Pat Jonasy shortstop.



      3.   The boys walked home from practice, their coach had left earlier.



      4.   I find the Sherwood proposition very appealingy however, I'd like to know more about
           the product before continuing.




      5. She explained that the outbound train is delayedy the news couldn't have been more

           unwelcome.




                               Up next is a section on dashes and parentheses.
                                                             LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   197




DASHES AND PARENTHESES

Dashes and parentheses set off information that isn’t essential to the meaning of a sentence.

Dashes call attention to information:

            Aileen has a knack for learning new computer software—even though
            she has never taken a class—and she often teaches her colleagues
            new computer skills.


And parentheses indicate that information is less important than the rest of the sentence:
            Aileen has a knack for learning new computer software (even though she has never
            taken a class), and she often teaches her colleagues new computer skills.


In that sentence, you could also use commas to set off the information about Aileen’s never hay-
ing taken a class. You would choose dashes to emphasize this information, and choose parenthe-
ses to deemphasize it.

DASHES


If youre setting off information that comes in the middle of a sentence, be sure to use a pair of
dashes: one before and one after the information.

INCORRECT        Asa   receptionist, Miri has several good qualities—a good voice and an excellent
                 memory, but she is sometimes rude to callers.


CORRECT          As a receptionist, Miri has several good qualities—a good voice and an excellent
                 memory—but she is sometimes rude to callers.

But if youre setting off information that comes at the end of a sentence, only one dash is
necessary:

            Mel was hoping to be given the new territory—he said that he was
            disappointed when it was assigned to Peter instead.


Never use a comma before or after a dash.


INCORRECT        [will not be able to meet with you on December 28,—our company closes down
                 that week—,but let’s try for the first week of January.

CORRECT          I will not be able to meet with you on December 28—our company closes down
                 that week—but let’s try for the first week of January.
198    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                    DIFFERENT WAYS TO TYPE A DASH


      The following are a hyphen, an en dash, and an em dash: - - — . We've used em dashes in
      this book (—), but many writers now use an en dash surrounded by spaces ( — ). Either
      kind of dash is correct; just be sure to be consistent and use only one kind.

      If neither kind of dash is available, it is also correct to use two side-by-side hyphens to
      represent a dash ( -- ), though em or en dashes look more professional. It's incorrect to use   _
      a single hyphen surrounded by spaces ( - ) to represent a dash.




PRACTICE

Insert dashes into these sentences.

       1. Because so many of our customers moved last year, our business dropped by 10 percent
          our first drop in three years.

       2. Brenda is delighted with her new position it is much more challenging than her previ-
          ous one and she is already preparing for her next promotion.
                                                         LESSON 6 USE CORRECT PUNCTUATION   199



ANSWERS


Here is where the dashes go:

    1. Because so many of our customers moved last year, our business dropped by 10 per-
       cent—our first drop in three years.

    2. Brenda is delighted with her new position—it is much more challenging than her previ-
       ous one—and she is already preparing for her next promotion.
200   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PARENTHESES


Readers often skip information included in parentheses (or pay less attention to it), so save pa-
rentheses for information that is not essential to your message.

             We are requesting bids for remodeling the building on Elm Avenue
             (formerly Sixth Street Center).

Also use parentheses when you want to present a new acronym:

             The engineers learned how to prepare an environmental impact as-
             sessment (EIA).


For parenthetical statements that appear in the middle of a sentence, do not use a comma before
the first parenthesis. You should use a comma after the closing parenthesis only if you would add
the comma at that place if the parenthetical information were removed.



INCORRECT            We have found a graphic design service-{Elephant Graphics) that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

INCORRECT            We have found a graphic design service (Elephant Graphics}, that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

CORRECT              We have found a graphic design service (Elephant Graphics) that does excellent
                     work and has reasonable prices.

The third example is correct because the sentence would have no comma without the name
Elephant Graphics: “We have found a graphic design service that does excellent work and has
reasonable prices.”




Here's an example of a sentence that could either include or omit a comma if the parenthetical
information were removed. If the comma is included, it must follow the parentheses.

INCORRECT            After the developers finish their field tests, {their deadline is May 15) they can
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.

CORRECT              After the developers finish their field tests (their deadline is May 15), they can —
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.

CORRECT              After the developers finish their field tests (their deadline is May 15) they can
                     give us a good idea of when we can launch the system.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   201




When parentheses set off words at the end of a sentence, the final punctuation mark goes outside
the parentheses.

               Emmie said she would chair the committee (she says the same thing
               every year).

               When do you think you will complete the project (assuming all goes
               well)?


When an entire sentence is enclosed in parentheses, put the final punctuation mark inside the
parentheses.

               You can use your telephone to listen to the radio. (You will need to
               purchase the optional radio headset accessory.)

               We will activate your membership on October 1. (Isn’t that the start
               date you requested?)


Always use both opening and closing parentheses.

INCORRECT          It seems likely that we will finish the project by next week (as long as we receive
                   the necessary information from the client, so it’s time to alert the Production
                   Department to expect our draft report.

CORRECT            It seems likely that we will finish the project by next week (as long as we receive
                   the necessary information from the client), so it’s time to alert the Production
                   Department to expect our draft report.




PRACTICE

Try inserting parentheses in these sentences to deemphasize information or correct the
punctuation.

     1. After months of research, the journalist found the information she needed in a July 14,
        2007, New York Times website article which she had saved on her computer, and then
        forgotten.

    2. Anne Sumida says she will not serve as director she is hoping for a transfer to the
       London branch, but she is willing to take on the job until someone is hired.

    3. It took us more than three weeks including two Saturdays to complete the Grady report.
202   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


You could have inserted parentheses as shown below.

      1. After months of research, the journalist found the information she needed in a July 14,
         2007, New York Times website article (which she had saved on her computer, and then
         forgotten).

      2. Anne Sumida says she will not serve as director (she is hoping for a transfer to the
         London branch), but she is willing to take on the job until someone is hired.

      3. It took us more than three weeks (including two Saturdays) to complete the Grady
         report.
                                                                 LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   203




 APOSTROPHES

 Apostrophes have two primary functions: to show possession, and to take the place of missing
 letters when you combine words to form contractions.

          EXAMPLES       OF POSSESSION:


          Thank you for inviting my client’s manager to your presentation.

          All four candidates’ references were excellent.

          EXAMPLES       OF CONTRACTIONS:


          It’s [it is] a very interesting perspective on the problem.

          We know you'll [you will] find our time management software very useful.

          I’ve [I have] enclosed a brochure.




 APOSTROPHES         TO SHOW POSSESSION


 Apostrophes usually show that a noun or pronoun possesses something. These apostrophes’ po-
 sition depends on whether the noun or pronoun is singular or plural.

 When the noun or pronoun is singular, you usually show possession by adding an apostrophe
 +S.

          the laptop’s screen            the team’s schedule

          my driver’s van                somebody’s briefcase

~ Most plural nouns end in s or es. To form the possessive, place the apostrophe after the final s.

          the students’ progress        two weeks’ worth of work [not “two weeks worth of work”

          the buses’ tires              the Mitulskis’ car [for the Mitulski family as a group]
204   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




For plural nouns that do not end in s, you usually indicate possession by adding an apostrophe +
s, just as you do for singular nouns and pronouns.

         the children’s accounts                           the women’s offices


         the mice’s nests                                  the oxen’s yokes



PRACTICE


Add apostrophes to these nouns and pronouns to indicate possession, as shown in the example.

         EXAMPLE         one carpenters hammer

         REVISION        one carpenter’s hammer




         the presidents office                    the mens locker room

         several days backlog                     anyones guess
                                                              LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   205




 ANSWERS


 These are the apostrophes you should have added:

         the president’s office             the men’s locker room

         several days’ backlog              anyone’s guess




 These eight possessive pronouns never need apostrophes. Some of them resemble contractions
 that always need apostrophes (it’s, there’s, who’s, and you’e).
         its                theirs                hers
         his                whose                 yours
         ours               your

 It’s important to remember that possessive pronouns already show possession—so do not add an
 apostrophe to them.

    INCORRECT                The truck needs it’s brakes adjusted.

    CORRECT                  The truck needs its brakes adjusted.


    INCORRECT                This table is not our’s.

    CORRECT                  This table is not ours.

 Another common error is to add apostrophes to plural nouns that are not possessive.

    INCORRECT                We plan to offer all our customer’s a rebate.

    CORRECT                  We plan to offer all our customers a rebate.

_ Never add an apostrophe to a noun unless you mean to show possession.




                                   Turn the page for some practice.
206    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Ee Ge
To show possession, add missing apostrophes and circle incorrect ones.

      1.   We will test each applicants skill level.

      2.   My assistant never makes mistake’s in entering data.

      3.   The refrigerator door fell off it’s hinges when we opened it.




                                   Check your answers on the next page.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   207




ANSWERS


  1.   We will test each applicant’s skill level.

  2.   My assistant never makes mistakes in entering data.

  3.   The refrigerator door fell off its hinges when we opened it.
208   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




APOSTROPHES           IN CONTRACTIONS


You form a contraction by combining two words, such as “it is” and “you are.” An apostrophe
replaces the missing letters.

Here are the correct contractions for some common word pairs:

         it is                   it’s

         you are                 you re
         they are                they’re
         you will                youll
         cannot                  can’t

         who is                  who’s

         will not                wont

Be careful not to confuse contractions with pronouns that show possession. They may sound
alike, but they’re different words and are written differently.

         POSSESSIVE                       The conference table has lost its luster.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      It’s been a profitable year for our stockholders.

         POSSESSIVE                       Please give me your comments on my report.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      Let me know when yow’re ready to discuss the problem.

         POSSESSIVE                       Tell your colleagues that I appreciate their ideas.
         PRONOUN


         CONTRACTION                      They will provide the information when they’
                                                                                     re ready.




                                  On the next page you'll find some practice.
                                                                LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   209




PRACTICE

Add apostrophes, where necessary, and circle missing apostrophes or incorrect words. Some
sentences have the correct possessive forms and contractions.


    i    Who’ cubicle is this?

    2.   I told her your going; you are, arent you?

         The plan appealed to us because of its practicality.

         Ive been planning it for weeks.

         Their careful work paid off. They're going to be promoted.




                                 Turn the page to check your answers.
210    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ANSWERS


      1.   Whose cubicle is this?

      2.   I told her youre going; you are, aren’t you?

      3.   The plan appealed to us because of its practicality. [correct]

      4.   I’ve been planning it for weeks.

      5.   Their careful work paid off. They’re going to be promoted. [correct]
                                                            LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   211




HYPHENS

Hyphens can be as complicated as apostrophes, but there are a handful of simple rules to follow.
The usual rule is to hyphenate a two-word phrase that describes a noun when the phrase comes
before the noun. The companion rule is to use a space and no hyphen between the same two
words after the noun.

EXAMPLES           The high-end merchandise sold well.


                   The merchandise is high end.


This approach also works with three-word or longer phrases, and hyphenated phrases that are
split up.

EXAMPLES           They design ready-to-wear clothing.

                   Their clothing is ready to wear.

                   The six- and seven-year-old students were separated into two groups.

                   The students are seven years old.

There are two exceptions to this rule. First, don't hyphenate a two-word phrase before a noun if
the first word ends in -ly. Do not hyphenate these -ly phrases after a noun, either.

EXAMPLES           Their carefully phrased suggestion had a good effect.

                   The conveniently located store may close next year.

                   The store may close next year, although it is conveniently located.

And second, a phrase is not hyphenated before or after a noun if it is very well known.

EXAMPLES           Word processing skills are required.

                   Post office prices change regularly.




                                Turn the page for some practice.
212    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




PRACTICE

Add hyphens, where necessary, and circle any incorrect hyphens. Each sentence may already be
correct.


      1. The proposal was well received.

      2.   It was a well received proposal.

      3.   ‘The latest real estate figures are in.

      4.   ‘The carefully-polished grant application impressed the foundation.

      5.   They saw their highest ever attendance last year.



                                    Check your answers on the next page.
                                                           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   213




ANSWERS


  1.   ‘The proposal was well received. [correct]

  2.   It was a well-received proposal.

  3.   ‘The latest real estate figures are in. [correct]

  4.   ‘The carefully polished grant application impressed the foundation. [incorrect: no
       hyphen]

  5.   They saw their highest-ever attendance last year.




                                 Turn the page for an assignment.
214     PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                                   Assignment

Review your own writing samples for run-on sentences and incorrect or missing commas, semi-
colons, colons, hyphens, and apostrophes. If you see any errors, write the originals and revisions
here.


ORIGINAL




REVISION




ORIGINAL




REVISION
           LESSON   6   USE CORRECT   PUNCTUATION   215




ORIGINAL




REVISION
216    PROFESSIONAL    WRITING    SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

      1.   A run-on sentence contains two or more                                 that are connected

           incorrectly.       (174)

      2.   A clause is set off with commas if it could be removed                                 the
           meaning of the sentence.           (184)

      3.   Use a semicolon to join two                                with a word such as “however,”
           therefore,’ etc.           (193)

      4.    Usea                             to introduce a series introduced by a phrase like the
           following, or by a stated or implied number.    (194)

      5.   Never add an apostrophe to a noun unless you mean to
           show                                      wr(205)

      6.   Never hyphenate two-word adverb phrases that endin ___.                        (211)

      7.   Hyphenate most two-word phrases when they come                                  a noun they
           describe.      (211)




WHAT?’S NEXT?


In this lesson, you've learned how to punctuate your document with confidence. In the next sec-
tion, you'll learn how to write e-mail that looks professional and gets results.
7                                        WRITE EFFECTIVE                             E-MAIL




INTRODUCTION

Now youre ready to apply the planning and writing skills you've learned in the previous lessons
to a specific type of writing which is probably crucial to your work life: e-mail.

The advances in electronic communication are rapidly changing the way we work. Yet common
writing challenges keep e-mail from being as productive as it could be.

People still send e-mail that is confusing, unprofessional, or offensive, or that lands them and
their organizations in court. Like any other business writing, effective, professional e-mail re-
quires thought and attention.

OBJECTIVES


This lesson will help you with the following challenges:
        ™   Writing clear, concise e-mail that quickly conveys the information people need
            and gets the results you want
        ™   Conveying a professional image of yourself and your organization through the e-
            mail you send
        m   Avoiding trouble by recognizing what topics and information are and are not
            appropriate
218   PROFESSIONAL      WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




E-mail is ideal for the kinds of quick messages that most of us send in response to questions, to
pass along information, and to make requests. We use e-mail because it's quick and easy—more
like leaving a phone message than writing. It may not seem to take the same kind of thinking
and planning time as writing a hard-copy letter, or a report.

But e-mail is still writing. Even if you have only a simple message to convey, you will get better
results if you stop and think about why youre writing, what information you want to pass along,
and what you want the recipient to do. Unplanned messages waste everybody's valuable time.




IS E-MAIL THE APPROPRIATE CHOICE FOR THIS MESSAGE?

What if you received the two e-mail messages below? Is e-mail the best way—or the right way—
to communicate the information? Why or why not?

              Dear Daniel,

             This is to notify you that you have come in more than half an hour late
             four days out of the past seven. We spoke about this issue during
             your last performance evaluation. If you show up late one more time, |
             will be forced to institute disciplinary proceedings.

              Sincerely,


              Larissa




              Billie,

              | Know how you feel about that invoice. | almost screamed at the
              finances woman when she kept telling me she didn’t have it. | can’t
              find my copy either, and | know you sent me at least two of them.

              Could you please fax me copies ONE MORE TIME? This will get
              solved today, or | start building a death-ray laser gun out of office
              supplies. Sorry for the tirade!

              By the way, | heard that your manager is thinking about leaving the
              company. His daughter told my daughter in gymnastics class.

              Better keep it to yourself, but | thought you’d like to know.

              Parker