Lesson 3,
you will learn how to use concise language.
                                                                                                   101




                                             USE CONCISE LANGUAGE


INTRODUCTION

Unnecessary words are obstacles to good business writing. They clutter up your sentences and
slow your readers down. They can also make your documents boring. By eliminating unneces-
sary words, you can keep your readers’ interest and make your writing easier to follow.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write more professionally and effectively with these strategies:
        m™ Finding single words for one-word ideas
        m™ Avoiding repetition
        @   Eliminating wasteful verbs and clauses

WHAT    YOU NEED

        @   The draft document that you completed in Lesson 1
        ™   Samples of your writing

Here are a few examples of sentence with clutter—words that take up space without adding
meaning. Which words do you think are unnecessary? Can you eliminate any words?

             e   Please let me know as to whether you will attend the party.

             e   The noise level of the trains arriving and departing from the station is low by
                 the current standards of the rapid-transit industry.

             e   There are several employees who want to take vacations in June.


Here are the words you could easily eliminate:

             e   Please let me know as-+e whether you will attend the party.
                                                                    trains
             e The noise level of the trains arriving and departing , fem
                                                                      +the-station is low
                 by the current standards? ofthe
                                           rapid-transitindustyy:
                              Several
             e There are-severat i employees whe want to take vacations in June.
102   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




In this lesson, you'll look at several ways to get rid of unnecessary words and you'll practice
revising wordy sentences. Then you'll review your own writing to see if you can make it more
concise.

USE ONE WORD           FOR A ONE-WORD                 IDEA

Sometimes you can collapse several words or a long phrase into one word that conveys your
message quickly and clearly: for instance, at a time prior to simply means before. The longer
phrase is dull and bulky. The single word does the same job more efficiently.

At other times, you can collapse a multiword phrase into one word by identifying the most im-
portant word of the phrase, turning that word into a different part of speech, and cutting out
words that don’t enhance your meaning.

ORIGINAL       We are in agreement with you about the contract terms.

REVISION       We agree with you about the contract terms.

ORIGINAL       She solved the problem in a clever way.

REVISION       She solved the problem cleverly.
                        ZOp=

               She cleverly solved the problem.

In the first example, the short verb “agree” delivers the full meaning of the longer phrase “are in
agreement.”

In the second example, “clever” is the most important word in the phrase “in a clever way.’ The
single word “cleverly” delivers the same meaning faster.

                                 Try a practice exercise on the next page.
                                                                  LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   103




PRACTICE

Eliminate unnecessary words or revise the sentences to make them more concise.

ORIGINAL      he client visited the site of the project in May.

REVISION      The client visited the project site in May.

    1.   She drove in a reckless manner.




    2. We conducted a survey of the members.




    3. The manager made an offer to buy everyone coffee.




    4.   I believe this procedure will make an improvement in the way reports are filed.




    5.   He called us in regard to his recent insurance claim.




    6. Due to the fact that she had been drinking, the accident was her fault.




                              Check your answers on the next page.
104    PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your answers should look something like this:

      1. She drove recklessly.

      2.   We surveyed the members.

      3. The manager offered to buy everyone coffee.

      4. I believe this procedure will improve how reports are filed.

      5. He called us about his recent insurance claim.

      6. Because she had been drinking, the accident was her fault.

AVOID REPETITION

Business writers often use two or more words that mean exactly the same thing, leading to un-
necessarily wordy sentences. Here are some common repetitive phrases:

      alternative choices                    equally as effective as    separate entities
      basic fundamentals                     symptoms indicative of     advance warning
      serious crisis                         desirable benefits         two halves
      final outcome                          important essentials       regular weekly meetings
      past experience                        end result                 absolutely complete
      surrounding circumstances           _ future plans                ten a.m. in the morning


A crisis is always serious, plans are always for the future, and ten a.m. doesn't happen at night.
These unnecessary words waste your readers’ time.


PRACTICE

Eliminate the unnecessary repetitions in these sentences.

       1. The urban residents of the city are unhappy with the new regulations.




      2. The subterranean garage, located underground, is more secure than the old one.




      3. Until last week, our group had the best record to date.
                                                                LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   105




Your revisions should look something like this. The underlined words convey the original sen-
tences full meaning without the wasteful extra words on the last page.

    1. The urban residents are unhappy with the new regulations.
                               (R=

         The city residents are unhappy with the new regulations.

    2. The subterranean garage is more secure than the old one.

    3.   Until last week, our group had the best record.




ELIMINATE WASTEFUL POSSESSIVES, CLAUSES, AND THERE IS PHRASES

Some possessive word forms add nothing to a sentence but unnecessary length.

ORIGINAL      Their assumption is that the company should always come first.

REVISION      ‘They assume the company should always come first.

Some sentences can be streamlined by removing unnecessary who, that, and which clauses.

ORIGINAL      ‘The broker who works in Chicago sent the file that is incomplete to the home
              office.

REVISION      The Chicago broker sent the incomplete file to the home office.


Also, phrases such as there is, there are, and there may be can clutter up sentences—either on
their own or by requiring extra words after the phrase.

ORIGINAL      There is a new package on your desk.

REVISION A new package is on your desk.


ORIGINAL      There may be several applicants who have the necessary background for this
              position.

REVISION      Several applicants may have the necessary background for this position.
106   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




PRACTICE

Revise these sentences to make them more concise.


      1. The members of the group who are interested in learning more about this software are
         welcome to attend the demonstration that will be conducted on February 16.




      2.   Tomorrow’s meeting, which will be held as always on the fourth floor, will include a
           speech about literacy in the workplace.




      3.   There are thousands of hours wasted because no one can use the files that are out of
           date.
                                                                    LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   107




Your revisions should be similar to these:

            The group members interested in learning more about this software are welcome
            to attend the February 16 demonstration.
            Tomorrow’ fourth-floor meeting will include a speech about literacy in the
            workplace.
            Thousands of hours are wasted because no one can use the out-of-date files.



PRACTICE

Here's a chance to pull together what you've learned so far. These sentences contain several kinds
of clutter. Revise them to be more concise.

             On the basis of your recent letter, | would like to take this opportunity
             to inform you that | will investigate the problem about the delay in
             processing your loan that you mentioned and send you a letter in or-
             der to report my findings.

             At this point in time, it is our understanding that the new computer
             system will have the capability of processing 50 percent more infor-
             mation than the amount that is processed by our present system.

             With regard to the current status of your request for additional office
             equipment, we have submitted a request for the purpose of obtaining
             the funds that are needed to initiate the purchase.




                               Check your answers on the next page.
108   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like this:

             Onthe-basis-ofyourrecentletter-I would like tetake
                                                           this opportunity

             to inform you that | will investigate the-probler-about the delay in

              processing your loan which-youmentioned and send-you atetterin-
                        write you with
                             a my findings.


                                                         EZOR=
                       Thank you for                         0
             Onthe basis of ayour recent letter A }would like to take this oppetu-

             Ay to
             inform-yeuthat                | will investigate the-preblem-about the delay in

             processing your loan which-youmentioned, and send you a letter ia-
                               with
             erderto report amy findings.

                                           We understana
             Atthis point in time itis our atnderstanding that the new computer
                                            be able to
             system will Ravethe-capabilityof aProcessing 50 percent more infor-
                 eA)
             mation


                                                         =OR=

                                       We now understana
             Atthis-pointintme itis our Atnderstanding that the new computer

             system will Ravethe-capabiityof processing 50 percent more infor-

             mation than the-amountwhichis-processed
                                                   by our present system.



                               We                  Reaver
                               e-have submitteda ,
             to purchase the office equiprient you eee
             iagthe funds ,


               You are probably getting good at spotting and eliminating clutter.
             Turn the page for one last practice before searching your own writing
                                    for unnecessary words.
                                                                    LESSON   3   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   109




PRACTICE

Revise these paragraphs to be as concise as possible without changing the meaning. You can
cross out or write in words on this page without recopying the letter.

            During the month of March, the people who are working on the HUF

            project team made a study of the past history of HUF in order to

            come to some conclusions as to whether the necessary information

            was available for the purpose of their determining the project goals.


            The people who were members of this study team are of the opinion

            that the original analysis was done in a hasty manner and there were

            several errors in the original conclusions. At this point in time, it ap-

            pears that the main question is a matter of making a decision as to

            whether you should discontinue the project, or the team should un-

            dertake and perform a new analysis.


            We have enclosed for your information the details that resulted from

            the study. Due to the fact that the short amount of time is a factor in

            this situation, we would greatly appreciate your reviewing the informa-

            tion, and your reaching a decision and informing us of it, in a prompt

            way.




                              Check your revisions on the next page.
110   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING    SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Your revisions should look something like this.

                                         ln
                                         aMarch, the
                                                 people-who-are-working-on the HUF
                          studieA                                                   ‘s histovy
              project team Ampade-a-study of the past history of HUF                 ,in-order to
                                                   AeciAe              they had
             cometosome-conclusions-aste                    ,whether athe necessary information
                                                       necessary to             Aeterwmine its
             was available for the purpese oftheir adetermining the-project agoals.

                                                                          velieve
             The people-who-were members of this study team ,are efthe opinion
                                                      hastily                        that
             that the original analysis was done jifra-hasty manner and there

             were several errors in the original conclusions. At+this-pointintime,-
              It       now
             it ,appears athat the main question is amaterotmaking-adecision-

             as-to whether you should discontinue the project, or the team should

              undertake and perform a new analysis.


             We have enclosed feryournfermaton
                                     the detais which resulted from
                         vesults                                            Since
             the study ,. Duetothe-fact
                                that the short amount of ,time is afacter
                               _ shovt
             inthis-stuation        , we would greatly appreciate yourreviewing
                                                                            the in-
                                                                    it if you
             formation_andyeurreaching a decision and ainforming us
             of ae Aecision soon.
              A      :                        :
                                                              LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   Tata




                                       Assignment

Read one or more of your writing samples. Select two or three sentences you think are cluttered
and write them below. Then revise the sentences so they are more concise.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




 ORIGINAL




- REVISION
112   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




ORIGINAL




REVISION
                                                                LESSON   3.   USE CONCISE   LANGUAGE   113




REVIEW

To review what you've learned in this lesson, answer these questions.

    1. _________ words are obstacles to good business writing. They clutter up your
         sentences, and slow your readers down.      (101)

    2.   Sometimes you can collapse several words or a long phrase into
         that conveys your message quickly and clearly   (102)

    3.   Some sentences can be streamlined by removing unnecessary
                          io   DD. eas PM     gHTa                       clauses.           (105)

    Aree irases ke                       Can                    clutter up sentences—either on
         their own, or by requiring extra words after the phrase. (105)




WHAT’S NEXT?

In this lesson, you've examined ways to streamline your language to hold your readers’ interest
and save them time. In