In Lesson 2 you will learn to use your writing plan to write a first draft. You'll see that once you
have completed the six planning steps, you've already done most of the work. Only the final
shaping is left.
58   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE
                                                                                                   59




                                             WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT


INTRODUCTION

When you have completed your writing plan, the first draft almost writes itself. You’ve already
done the hard work—deciding what you want to accomplish, finding the right words to express
your main points, and selecting and organizing the facts and ideas you need to influence or in-
form readers.

The next step is to use that plan to write a first draft.

OBJECTIVES


In this lesson, you'll learn to write a professional and effective first draft by:
         ™   Reviewing your writing plan and revising it as needed to make sure it is sound
         m   Writing an opening that catches readers’ attention and clearly states what you are
             writing about
         ™   Using transitions to link points, paragraphs, and sections smoothly
         ™   Using lists to present information so readers can grasp it quickly
             Writing a closing that sums up points as needed and tells readers clearly what
             happens next

WHAT    YOU NEED

         =   ‘Two or three samples of your writing
         m@ The writing plan that you completed in Lesson 1

REVIEW YOUR WRITING PLAN

Before starting the first draft, take a few moments to review your writing plan. There are two
reasons for doing this:
         m   If there are any inconsistencies in the plan, it's important to correct them before
             you begin the first draft.
         ™   This review helps you keep your plan in mind when you start writing—particu-
             larly if time has passed since you finished planning.
60   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




Here are some questions to ask as you review your writing plan:

             Have I considered my readers’ point of view?
             Have I correctly identified my primary purpose?
             Does my key sentence accomplish my primary purpose?
             WRITING TO INFLUENCE
                        Explain why readers should do what I want them to do?
             WRITING TO INFORM
                        Introduce and/or summarize what readers need to know?
             Have I eliminated unnecessary information?
             Have I included all necessary information?
             Have I organized the information logically and effectively—from the reader's
             point of view?

If you answer “No” to any of these questions, take a closer look at your writing plan. Before you
start the first draft, be sure the plan accurately expresses what you intend to say.
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   61




WRITE AN INVITING OPENING

Why do you think that openings are important? Write down a few reasons here:




The first few lines of any piece of writing are extremely important. It is in the opening paragraph
that you must catch your readers’ attention, set the right tone, and make it clear what you are
writing about.

Read these two openings. Which opening makes you want to continue?

E-MAIL 1      This is in reference to your recent e-mail which was passed to this department for
              review. Unfortunately, the information you requested is not available at this point
              in times

E-MAIL 2.     Thank you for asking about the August 5 computer class. I am sorry that we do not
              yet know the instructor’s name or the location, but we should be able to send you
              all the details by July 15.

You probably preferred the opening of E-Mail 2. E-Mail 1’s opening uses a lot of clichés such as,
“This is in reference to... .” It communicates little specific information.

The opening of E-Mail 1, in contrast, was clearly written by one person to another. It responds
directly to specific questions. The writer gets to the point quickly and provides details.

Here are the criteria for an effective opening:
        m   It establishes a personal contact with the reader and sets the right tone—particu-
            larly important tasks when your primary purpose is to influence
        m   It catches the reader's attention
        m   It includes a key sentence that tells the reader what you are writing about
        ™   It is no more than three or four sentences long
62   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are some examples of openings. In each set, put an X next to the opening you think best
meets the criteria.


            A) We hereby acknowledge receiving your message dated April 20. Your complaint
               has been taken under advisement.

            B) Thank you for telling us about the missing parts in the equipment you recently
                purchased. We will be happy to replace the parts, but we need the following
                information ....



            A) Per your recent inquiry concerning delivery of your car, a fax was sent to the at-
               tention of the manufacturer. We are pleased to provide you with a photocopy of
               the response we received.

            B) Weare happy to say that your car will arrive in port on Wednesday, August 1.
               You can pick it up any time after noon on Thursday, August 2.


If you preferred Opening B in each set, then you recognize an effective opening.

One quick way to improve openings is to avoid overused phrases like these:


       With reference to ...                                      Regarding your recent communication ...
       Pursuant to ...                                        We are in receipt of your message ...
       Enclosed, please find ...                                  On the above date and time ...
       Please be advised ...                                  This is in regards to ...
       Attached herewith ...                                      Per your request ...
       | am writing to inform you ...
                                                              LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   63




Here are some examples of how to replace overused phrases with simple, direct language:



    Per your request for shipping                 As you asked, here are the instructions
    instructions ...                              for preparing your shipment.

    Please be advised that your                   Unfortunately, your shipment has been
    shipment has been delayed.                    delayed.
    Enclosed, please find copies of your          | have enclosed copies of your last three
    last three invoices.                          invoices.

                                                  | am sending copies of your last three
                                                  invoices.

                                                  Here are copies of your last three
                                                  invoices.

    | am writing to inform you that your          We have found your shipment.
    shipment has been located.
    This is in regards to your recent             Thank you for telling us that you appreci-
    communication regarding our                   ated our customer service team’s quick
    service.                                      response to your questions about our
                                                  software.

    We are in receipt of your message in          As you asked, we are happy to send
    regards to the vacant position.               you an application for the position of
                                                  Community Relations Director.
64   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




EXERCISE

Using your imagination to fill in missing details, revise the following openings so they cover the
following points:
         @   make a personal contact with the reader,             Hint    tt will be easier to revise
             set the right tone, and catch the reader's           the openings if you look
             attention                                               at the message from the
         ™ include a key sentence that tells the reader                   reader's point of view.
             what you are writing about
         ™   are no more than three or four sentences long

OPENING 1

              Please be advised that your comments on the proposed Computer
              Training Program, received by this office on June 3, have been
              reviewed and, where appropriate, incorporated into the program.




OPENING 2

              | am writing to inform you that payment has not yet been received for
              the current month. The conditions of your note specify that payment
              be made no later than the first day of each month. It is imperative that
              payment be received within 10 days of the date of this message.
                                                               LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   65




OPENING 3

           Attached please find a copy of the Assistant Director’s message to
           Acme Products. Also attached is a copy of the message to Alex Stein
           from Acme’s CEO, as well as a copy of the Test Plan form, which was
           written by Bill Jordan.




ANSWERS

Here are the kinds of changes you might have made.

                                          OPENING 1

ORIGINAL     Please be advised that your comments on the proposed Computer Training
             Program, received by this office on June 3, have been reviewed and, where appro-
             priate, incorporated into the program.

REVISION     ‘Thank you for your comments on the proposed Computer Training Program.
             We have incorporated the suggested changes listed below.

                                          OPENING 2

ORIGINAL     | am writing to inform you that payment has not yet been received for the current
             month. The conditions of your loan specify that payment be made no later than
             the first day of each month. It is imperative that payment be received within 10
             days of the date of this message.

REVISION     We have not yet received the loan payment that was due on April 1. Please make
             sure we receive it no later than April 25.

                                          OPENING 3

ORIGINAL     Attached please find a copy of the Assistant Director’s message to Acme Products.
             Also attached is a copy of the message to Alex Stein from Acme’s CEO, as well as a
             copy of the Test Plan form, which was written by Bill Jordan.

REVISION     I’m enclosing copies of the following:
             ¢ the Assistant Director’s message to Acme Products
             ¢ the Acme CEO’s message to Alex Stein
             ¢ Bill Jordan’s Test Plan form
66    PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




                                               SUMMARIES


     When youre writing a report, business plan, or proposal, consider including asummary
     for your reader. Summaries, also known as report summaries and executive summaries,
     serve a different purpose from introductions or background statements.

     Under most circumstances, an introduction or background statement is read by people
     who will read the rest of the document. The purpose is to establish a context for what
     people are going to read.

     On the other hand, a summary might be read by people who will never see—or never
     read—the entire document. Summaries are designed for people who need to know your
     most important message and the key facts you have included to inform or influence your
     reader about that important message.

     It’s a good idea to write the summary after you've developed the writing plan. Then you
     can use the summary statements from the writing plan to develop your report or executive
     summary.

     Keep the following points in mind when you write summaries:
           ¢ Always state your most important message at the beginning of the summary
           ¢ Put the summary at the beginning of the document
           ¢ Keep the summary short (between half a page and a full page is ideal; some
             experts say that a summary should be no longer than one tenth of the entire
             document)

           ¢ Make sure that the summary covers all the main points and that they are in the
             same order as in the main document
           ¢ Focus on the most important points—remember that readers can turn to the
             main document if they want or need more details
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   67




TRANSITIONS

To make your writing more readable, use transitions to connect your ideas. A transition is a
word, phrase, or sentence that relates a new topic to the previous one, smoothly connecting the
parts of a piece of writing.

Transitions are rather like the cartilage and tendons that hold your bones together. They form a
connective tissue that links your ideas to one another. In writing, transitions show readers how
your ideas fit together, help you achieve continuity, and help readers follow your points easily.

Read this e-mail. Notice how the boldfaced words and phrases serve as transitions, helping the
reader see the connection between points.

            Alex:

            Thanks for calling yesterday to ask about this year’s sales conference.
            The Planning Committee is running a little behind schedule, but I’m
            happy to tell you what we know so far.

            Despite the problem we had with meeting space last year, we’ve de-
            cided to give Lazy Acres another try. Everyone rates the other facili-
            ties very highly. In particular, people like the tennis courts and exer-
            cise equipment. Also, the guest rooms are spacious, SO we can use
            them for small group meetings.

            Although the date is still under discussion, we’re looking at the sec-
            ond week in August. We are, however, also considering September;
            for one thing, the August date might interfere with people’s vacation
            plans.

            Unless we run into a snag, we hope to have firm plans by the end of
            the month. I'll let you Know what | know as soon as | know it. Until
            then, feel free to pass this information on to your staff.
68     PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS:   A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




Here are examples of words and phrases you can use to link points, sections and paragraphs:
ADDITIONS                               CONTRASTS                COMPARISONS
again                                   although                 equally
also                                    but                      in the same way
and also                                despite                  similarly
as well as                              however
as you asked                            nevertheless             EMPHASIS

equally important                       unless                   above all
for one thing                           until                    certainly
further                                                          especially
furthermore                             RESULT                   indeed
in addition                             accordingly              in fact
moreover                                as a consequence         in other words
next                                    as a result              in particular
now                                     consequently             of course
                                        for that reason
                                        thus                     SUMMARY
                                                                 finally
                                                                 on the whole
                                                                 to sum up
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   69




PRACTICE

Underline the transitions in this message. Notice how they help link the points and improve the
tone.
            Dear Frieda:

               As you asked, | am happy to suggest a marketing consultant
            for your new project. The person | recommend most highly is Kate
            Jackson.

                | worked with Kate for two years at Vision West. Although we were
            in different departments, we worked together on at least five projects.
            She was reliable and pleasant. Best of all, she seemed to have a nev-
            er-ending store of creative ideas, although she never tried to impose
            them on the group. In fact, she was quite willing to drop any plan that
            didn’t seem workable.

               Unless Kate’s situation has changed since | last spoke to her in
            May, | suspect she will be very interested in your position. She will, of
            course, want to know something about the opportunities it offers for
            advancement.

               | hope Kate works out for you. If not, give me a call and I'll keep
            my eyes open for someone else.
7O   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Did you underline these transitions?

              Dear Frieda:

                 As you asked, | am happy to suggest a marketing consultant
              for your new project. The person | recommend most highly is Kate
              Jackson.

                  | worked with Kate for two years at Vision West. Although we were
              in different departments, we worked together on at least five projects.
              She was reliable and pleasant. Best of all, she seemed to have a nev-
              er-ending store of creative ideas, although she never tried to impose
              them on the group. In fact, she was quite willing to drop any plan that
              didn’t seem workable.

                 Unless Kate’s situation has changed since | last spoke to her in
              May, | suspect she will be very interested in your position. She will, of.
              course, want to know something about the opportunities it offers for
              advancement.

                 | hope Kate works out for you. If not, give me a call and |’ll keep
              my eyes open for someone else.


USING LISTS

How do you read business documents? Chances are, you don't linger over the words the way
youd linger over a novel. Instead, you probably scan the document to pick out the main points
and the details you need.

Taking the reader’s point of view, it’s easy to see that paragraphs are not always the best way to
present information. The more technical or complicated the information, the more likely it is to
be lost when it’s presented in paragraph form.

Your goal as a writer is to help readers find information as quickly as possible. To show consider-
ation and speed things up for your reader, look for opportunities to present information in lists.

Read the examples on the next two pages. They both present the same information, but look
how much easier this information is to scan when it’s in list form.
                                                       LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   hal




Dear Ms. Fratelli:

    To process your loan application, we need the following informa-
tion and documents as soon as possible.

   In item 12A, please enter the name and address of the lender who
holds your second deed of trust. The current balances on all your
credit cards and outstanding loans should be entered in items 16B
and 16C, except for your automobile loans (item 16D).

   The name and address of your previous employers should be en-
tered in Item 6C if you have been at your current job for less than two
years. Include an explanation of any gap in employment during the
past ten years.

   List the balances on your bank accounts in item 4A. Include the
name and address of the institution and the account number. Use
items 4B, C, and D for certificates of deposit, stocks, etc., as shown.

   The purpose of the loan should be entered in item 3, along with the
amount requested. Finally, be sure to sign and date the form in item
23. The completed form should be sent to the loan processor along
with copies of your last two years’ tax returns and copies of your
most recent pay stubs.

   Please let me know if you have questions.

                      Sincerely,
72   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVISION

              Dear Ms. Fratelli:

                 To process your loan, we need a completed application as soon
              as possible. Please send the completed form to the loan processor
              along with copies of the following two documents:

                     Your last two years’ tax returns

                     Your most recent pay stubs

              On the application form, please complete the following items:

                     Describe the purpose of the loan and enter the amount requested.

                     List the balances on your bank accounts (4A). Enter the name and ad-
                     dress of the institution and the account number. List any certificates of
                     deposit, stocks, etc., as shown (4B, 4C, and 4D).

                     If you have been at your current job for less than two years, enter the
                     name and address of your previous employers (6C). Include an explana-
                     tion of any gap in employment during the past ten years.

                     Enter the name and address of the lender who holds your second deed
                     of trust (12A).

                     List the current balances on all your credit cards (16B), outstanding
                     loans (16C), and automobile loans (16D).

                     Sign and date the form (Item 23).

              Please let me know if vou have questions.

                                          Sincerely,
                                                                     LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   73




GUIDELINES FOR USING LISTS

You can use a list in business writing—and, often, you should use a list—whenever you present
three or more related pieces of information. Lists are more effective than long paragraphs be-
cause they
         @   communicate information quickly
         ™@ save valuable writing time
         m   reduce the chance of grammar and punctuation errors

To make sure your lists are easy to read, follow the five guidelines below. Full illustrations of each
of these guidelines follow the list.


    1. Introduce the list. Every list needs an introductory statement, if only a few words, that
       tells readers what the list is about and puts the list items in context. Make sure that you
       leave a space between the introductory statement and the first list item.

    2. Make sure that all items belong on the list. All items on the list should relate directly
       to the introductory statement.

    3.   Be consistent with initial capitalization, sentence structure, and end punctuation.

         m   If you capitalize the first word of one line, capitalize the first word in every line.
         ™   Items in any single list should all be complete sentences, or all be sentence frag-
             ments. List items that are sentence fragments should not end in periods, and do
             not have to begin with capital letters (unless the first word is a proper noun).
         =   For lists of complete sentences, end punctuation (periods or question marks) is
             only necessary for each item if any item contains more than one sentence. In any
             list of complete sentences, you must use end punctuation after all the list’s items if
             even one list item has end punctuation.

    4.   Keep the list parallel in form. For example, if one item begins with an -ing verb tense,
         then all items should begin with -ing verbs.

    5.   Organize the list for your readers. Lists that include more than five or six items can be
         difficult to follow. Make lists easier to read by organizing the items into main points and
         subpoints.
74   PROFESSIONAL    WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are examples to illustrate the five guidelines for lists that you just read.

     1.   Introduce the list.

          A list should never stand alone: it needs an introductory statement. The first item in a list
          cant introduce the list itself.

          WITHOUT AN INTRODUCTION

              e      We offer several thank-you gifts

              e      A10% discount on purchases during May

              e      Adiscount coupon for the Milano Ristorante

              e      Acomplimentary bottle of our best olive oil


          WITH AN INTRODUCTION

              To express our appreciation for your business, we would like to offer
              you a choice of the following thank-you gifts:

              e      A10% discount on purchases during May

              e      Adiscount coupon for the Milano Ristorante

              e      Acomplimentary bottle of our best olive oil

     2. Make sure that all items belong on the list. All items on the list should relate directly
        to the introductory statement.

          NOT ALL ITEMS RELATE TO THE INTRODUCTORY                          STATEMENT

              To prepare the room for training, please do the following:

              e     Set up the tables in a U shape

              e     Put two flipcharts in the front of the classroom

              e     Place the projector on the table in the corner

              e     Make sure that there are lots of exercises and opportunities to practice
                                                             LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   75




ALL ITEMS RELATE TO THE INTRODUCTORY                         STATEMENT

    When training is over, please do the following things:

    e   Recycle used flipchart pages

    e   Turn off the projector and store it in the closet

    e   Put the tables and chairs back the way you found them

    e   Give the completed evaluations to Melissa

Be consistent with initial capitalization, sentences or sentence fragments, and end
punctuation.


Use end punctuation only when at least one item contains more than one complete
sentence. In paragraphs, sentences’ end punctuation (periods and question marks) tells
readers when one sentence stops and another starts. In lists, end punctuation is only
necessary if an item contains more than one sentence. That’s because the format of a list
clearly shows where one item stops and another begins. It’s not wrong to use end punctu-
ation for single sentences in a list. But if you use end punctuation for one item, you must
use it for all items.

END PUNCTUATION            UNNECESSARY

    We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

    ¢   Two team members resigned in October and we have been unable to re-
        place them

    e   The client expanded the project scope

    e   Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our investigation

END PUNCTUATION            NECESSARY

    Here is a Summary of our findings:

    e   The costs of moving to a new location will be higher than we originally
        estimated.

    e   According to the most current figures, the total cost will exceed $150,000.
76   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




              e     If we delay the move for five years, we will need an additional 10,000
                    square feet of space.

              e     Only 30 percent of our employees say they would be willing to move out of
                    California. Over 60 percent, however, would be willing to consider a move
                    within the northern area of the state.

          The following list is hard to read because its format is inconsistent.

          INCONSISTENT

              We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

                    ¢    Two team members resigned in October. We have been unable to re-
                         place them.

                    ®    expanded project scope

                    e    Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our
                         investigation


          The periods in the first item are inconsistent with the complete sentence in the third
          item, which has no period. The uncapitalized sentence fragment is distracting because its
          form is inconsistent with the other two items. As a general rule, start bulleted items with
          a capital; it looks more professional.

          Here’s the same list in a consistent format.


          CONSISTENT

              We are unable to meet the original deadline for the following reasons:

                    ¢    Two team members resigned in October and we have been unable to
                         replace them

                    e    The client expanded the project scope

                    e    Three weeks of heavy rain made it impossible to complete our
                         investigation

     4.   Keep the list parallel in form.
          The items in a list must be parallel—presented in the same forms. For example, if one
          item begins with a verb, all the items must begin with verbs. If one item is a complete
          sentence, all the items must be complete sentences.
                                                                LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   77




     NOT PARALLEL

         The agenda for the March meeting includes the following:

               Discussion of the new health plan, which will be available to all perma-
               nent full-time employees

               Whether to revise the procedures manual

               Early-retirement policy


     PARALLEL

         At the March meeting, we will do the following:

               Discuss the new health plan, which
               will be available to all permanent full-
                ;                                          For more about parallel struc-
               time employees
                                                           ture, see Lesson 5: Use Correct
               Decide whether to revise the proce-         Grammar, page 137.
               dures manual                                                      -

               Draft an early-retirement policy

5.   Organize the list for your reader.
     As a general rule, keep lists short. There should be no more than five or six items on your
     list. When long lists are necessary, reorganize them as two or more shorter lists. Make
     long lists easier for your readers to scan by organizing the items into main points and
     subpoints.

     TOO MANY       ITEMS

         Please supply the following for the conference that begins on
         October 22:

               30 writing tablets for each meeting room

               Five laptops for the community room

               An overhead projector for each meeting room

               Coffee, tea, and pastry in the foyer each morning

               Four round tables for each meeting room

              At least five telephones with outside lines in the community room

              A basket of fruit for each table in the meeting rooms

              A registration table in the foyer
78   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




         ITEMS ORGANIZED                   WITH SUBPOINTS

              Please supply the following for the conference that begins on
              October 22:

              In each meeting room:

                    ¢    30 writing tablets

                    e    An overhead projector

                    e    Four round tables

                    e A basket of fruit for each table

              In the community room:

                    e    Five laptops

                    e    At least five telephones with outside lines

              In the foyer:

                    ¢    Coffee, tea, and pastry each morning

                    e Aregistration table
                                                                 LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   79




TRY IT


Use the space below or a blank sheet of paper to rewrite this paragraph in list format. Remember
to include an introductory statement that tells readers what the list is about and establishes the
context. Remember to follow the guidelines on page 73.

            The task force found that the customer service representatives need
            training in how to respond to problems and complaints. There is
            widespread unhappiness about the quality of food in the cafeteria,
            indicating the need to find another vendor. How to implement flexible
            hours without creating logistical problems requires additional study.
            Finally, field representatives need more powerful laptops, which have
            not been included in this year’s budget. These are the primary areas
            of concern the members of the task force believe they need to ad-
            dress during the next six months.
80   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Here are two ways to revise that paragraph into a list:

REVISION      1

              Below are the primary areas of concern the members of the task force
              believe they need to address during the next six months:

                    e The customer service representatives need training in how to respond to
                      problems and complaints

                    e There is widespread unhappiness about the quality of food in the cafete-
                      ria, indicating the need to find another vendor

                    e Additional study is needed to determine how to implement flexible hours
                      without creating logistical problems

                    e    Field representatives need more powerful laptops, which have not been
                         included in this year’s budget


REVISION 2

              The task force members believe they must do the following during the
              next six months:

                    e    Train customer service representatives to respond to problems and
                         complaints

                    e    Search for a new vendor who will improve the quality of food in the
                         cafeteria

                    e    Study ways to implement flexible hours without creating logistical
                         problems

                    e    Find funds to provide field representatives with the more powerful lap-
                         tops they need
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   81




                                                                                                 paragraph
TRYIT       Use the space below or a blank sheet of paper to rewrite and reformat this
seeeeeees   3 alist.

                      To help us update our database, please review the enclosed
                      listings and notify us of any changes. First, proofread each
                      listing and indicate any necessary corrections. Then please
                      enter the best address for clients to reach you and at the
                      same time verify that the telephone and fax numbers and e-
                       mail addresses are correct. Finally, if you wish, you may add
                       a maximum of two lines of explanation to each listing.
82   PROFESSIONAL       WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




REVISION

Here's one way to present the information more effectively. Your version might differ.

             To help us update our database, please review the enclosed listings
             and notify us of any changes:

                    e    Proofread each listing and indicate any necessary corrections

                    e    Enter the best address for clients to reach you

                    e    Verify that telephone and fax numbers and e-mail addresses are correct

                    e    If you wish, add a maximum of two lines of explanation to each listing
                                                                   LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   83




USING HEADINGS

Can you think of any reasons to use headings in your documents?




                                    The Benefits of Headings
        ™   Headings make it easier for people to find information. At work, people don't read
            every word of every document.
        ™   Headings make a document more attractive by creating an organized visual lay-
            out. Research shows that long, dense paragraphs are the most difficult and dis-
            couraging way to present information to your readers. Headings are a good way to
            break up dense text.
        ™   Headings force you to group relevant facts and information together. This makes
            your document easier for readers to follow.

Headings make your documents easier to understand by presenting your reader with concise
themes. Headings are essential if your document is long or complicated, or contains technical
information. The planning process itself helps you come up with the headings: once you group
information into categories, the headings practically identify themselves.

Here's a single e-mail without headings, and then with them.

WITHOUT     HEADINGS

            Ali:

            Hope you can come to the meeting this summer. The annual presi-
            dents’ circle sales meeting will be held at the Hilton in San Francisco
            and you should bring your updated presentations and spreadsheets.
            You can make travel arrangements yourself or Pam can help you.
            We’ll have one day of learning with workshop leaders including Jamie
            Hartwell, Linda Lou, and Peter Panino, and one day to look internally
            at our processes with Jack Deiner.

            We’re going to Alcatraz. It will be three days long with an optional din-
            ner on Tuesday night. Sally is no longer available to help with travel
            arrangements. Another agenda will be sent out. You can come on
            Wednesday morning or Tuesday night but make sure that you’re there
            till Friday morning. Bring comfortable walking shoes. If you make the
            travel arrangements yourself, use billing code 55789. You don’t need
84   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL GUIDE




              to bring anything else. You were selected because you did a great
              job.




WITH HEADINGS

              Subject: Annual Presidents’ Circle Sales Meeting, July 14-17, 2009

              Ali:

              Because of the great job you did this year, you’ve been invited to
              the Presidents’ Circle Sales Meeting in San Francisco this summer.
              Following is all the information you'll need to make your travel ar-
              rangements. We’ll send you a more detailed agenda by May 1.

                                         Meeting Dates and Location

              The meeting will be held in the San Francisco Hilton from Tuesday,
              July 14th, through Friday, July 17th, 2009.

                                             Travel Arrangements

              The travel process has changed; Sally is no longer available to help.
              You can make arrangements yourself using your company credit card
              and billing code 55789, or ask Pam to help.

                                                   What to Bring

              Please bring your updated spreadsheets and presentations. Also,
              bring comfortable walking shoes for an outing to Alcatraz on Friday
              morning. We’ll provide everything else you need.

                                                      Agenda

              e Tuesday: meet for dinner at the hotel restaurant at 7 p.m. (optional)

              e      Wednesday: meetings 9-5 with Jamie Hartwell, Linda Lou, and Peter
                     Panino, followed by dinner at Aziza

              e      Thursday: meetings 9-5 with Jack Deiner followed by dinner at La Mar
                     Cebicheria

              e      Friday: morning excursion to Alcatraz; meeting convenes at 1 p.m.

             That’s it! Please let me know if you have any questions. I’ll send out a
             detailed agenda by May 1st. Thanks, and congratulations!
                                                                    LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   85




CLOSING PARAGRAPHS

A strong closing achieves the following goals:
        @   makes a final personal contact with readers (a crucial factor when you're writing
            to influence)

        @   wraps up any loose ends
        ™   tells readers clearly what happens next
        ™   uses specific language

A closing paragraph might also do the following:
        ™   restate what readers should do
        m@ restate what readers should know

Compare these two closings. Which do you prefer?

CLOSING 1           It would be appreciated if this situation could be rectified in a timely manner.
                    Any questions can be addressed to this writer at the above address.

CLOSING 2           Please find the missing file by June 15. If I can help in any way, please call me
                    at (510) 655-6477.


You probably preferred Closing 2. The first closing is impersonal and vague. The second is spe-
cific to the situation and conveys useful information.

Here are examples of the kinds of clichés that sound tired—as if they were produced by a ma-
chine rather than by a person.

        Please contact the undersigned regarding time constraints on this policy.

        Your assistance and cooperation will be greatly appreciated.

        Do not hesitate to contact this writer should you require additional information.


Minor changes can transform those closings by making them specific to the piece of writing.
86   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                    INSTEAD        OF ...                                       TRY THIS «.:
     Please contact the above regarding time                  Please call John Alcotts about the expiration
     constraints on this policy.                              date on this policy.



     Your assistance and cooperation will be                  | will be grateful for any help you can give me in
     greatly appreciated.                                     tracking down the correct phone number.



     Do not hesitate to contact this writer                   If you need a map or specific directions, please
     should you require additional information.               let me know.
                                                                 LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   87




PRACTICE

Write a closing for this message.




             Dear Mr. Hogan:

             Thank you for asking about our new Flexible Loan Program. I’m
             happy to send a brochure that describes the program and includes an
             application.

             We designed this program after many discussions with customers
             about what types of lending arrangements they wanted. | think you’ll
             find it offers some unique ways of meeting your financial needs.




             Turn the page to see an example of a closing you might have written.
88   PROFESSIONAL WRITING SKILLS: A WRITE IT WELL GUIDE




ANSWER


Here's one possible conclusion for the message.



              Dear Mr. Hogan:

             Thank you for asking about our new Flexible Loan Program. I’m
             happy to send a brochure that describes the program and includes an
             application.

             We designed this program after many discussions with customers
             about what types of lending arrangements they wanted. | think you'll
             find it offers some unique ways of meeting your financial needs.

             Please let me know if you have questions about this loan pro-
             gram. If | haven’t heard from you, I’ll call in two weeks to see if
             you’d like to apply for a loan under this new program.
                                                                              LESSON    2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   89




REVIEW

Fill in the blanks with the correct word or phrase. If you're not sure what to write, turn to the
page number in the parentheses to the right of the sentence.

    1. Before starting to write the first draft, always
                                                                      your writing plan.        (59)

    2. An effective opening:
        MG cstablishes.ec- et
                           5 oe                                .contact-with thes.
        Mire          otc neciie Tene! Gee. oa          eee                SS
        M@ includes a key sentence that tells the reader what you are


        Mi no mnored Nan =
                         eee                                                           OF
        eeeS                                      Sentenecs. lone   (61)

    37 Wse tramsijonsiones Soh oe syourddeds,
                            se 24                                                (67)

    4. A strong closing:
         @           makes a final
         a                                                                 with readers
         aia                  fee    FO Se Oe oe                           the mam pomt
         @           wraps up any

         @           tells readers clearly what
         Bibtic or          Oval ve Ss SA         DY Pie                                       language       455)




                                       Now turn the page for an assignment.
90   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




It's time to try out everything you've learned in this lesson.

You will draft a document, using the writing plan you completed at the end of Lesson 1.

OPTION: _ If you wish, you may start with a new situation. But be sure to use a new Writing
          Worksheet to develop a new writing plan. Don’t ignore everything you’ve
          learned so far by starting a draft without a plan!
                                                                   LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   91




                                   WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:


   1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
        VIEW.

        Name or describe reader(s):


        Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
        boxes:

        IS YOUR READER ...
        ™   expecting to hear from you?
        @   familiar with the subject?
        m@ already interested in what you have to say?
        m@ likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
        m   likely to find what you have to say useful?
        ™   familiar with your views on the subject?
        m@ already committed to a point of view?
        m   likely to agree with your point of view?
        @   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
        ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

   2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                              L]   INFLUENCE              L]   INFORM

   3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
        MESSAGE:

        I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
92   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     4.    LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE THE FIRST DRAFT   93




5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
     CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




     Continue on another page if necessary.
94   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




                                          WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:

     1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOU’RE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
          VIEW.

          Name or describe reader(s):

          Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
          boxes:

          IS YOUR READER            ...

          ™   expecting to hear from you?
          @   familiar with the subject?
          ™   already interested in what you have to say?
          m   likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
          @   likely to find what you have to say useful?
          ™   familiar with your views on the subject?
          m™ already committed to a point of view?
          m@ likely to agree with your point of view?
          @   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
          ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

     2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                                    L]    INFLUENCE               L]   INFORM

     3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
          MESSAGE:

          I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
                                               LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   95




4.   LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




      Continue on another page if necessary.
96   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




     6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
          CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                                  LESSON   2   WRITE   THE   FIRST DRAFT   97




                                     WRITING WORKSHEET

SUBJECT:


   1.   LOOK AT WHAT YOWRE GOING TO WRITE FROM YOUR READERS’ POINT OF
        VIEW.

        Name or describe reader(s):


        Think about your readers’ needs, interests, and concerns. Then check the appropriate
        boxes:

        IS YOUR READER         ...

        ™   expecting to hear from you?
        @   familiar with the subject?
        ™   already interested in what you have to say?
        m@ likely to consider you an authority on the subject?
        m@ likely to find what you have to say useful?
        ®™ familiar with your views on the subject?
        m@ already committed to a point of view?
        m   likely to agree with your point of view?
        ®   likely to find your message uncomfortable?
        ™   (other needs, interests, and concerns)

   2.   DECIDE ON YOUR PRIMARY PURPOSE:

                              L]     INFLUENCE           L]   INFORM

   3.   COMPOSE A KEY SENTENCE THAT EXPRESSES YOUR MOST IMPORTANT
        MESSAGE:

        I want my reader(s) to do or to know:
98   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS; A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




     4.    LIST THE FACTS AND IDEAS TO INCLUDE:




          Continue on another page if necessary.
                                                      LESSON   2   WRITE   THE FIRST DRAFT   99




    5.   GROUP POINTS INTO CATEGORIES (Key points):




    6.   WRITE A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ONE TO THREE SENTENCES FOR EACH
         CATEGORY, AND PUT THEM IN ORDER.




Continue on another page if necessary.
100   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




WHAT?’S NEXT?

The next four lessons give you tools to shape the final language of your document. In