LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   219




You probably agree that e-mail was not the appropriate choice for either of these messages.
Larissa’s message to Daniel addressed performance issues, which should always remain confi-
dential and are best addressed in person. And Parker used e-mail to vent his feelings, something
he might later regret. He also passed on a rumor, assuming that Billie would keep it confidential.

Convenience is not a good-enough reason for using e-mail to communicate certain kinds of in-
formation. E-mail is too public for some messages. It’s more like sending a postcard than sealing
a letter into an envelope.

CONSIDER THE CONSEQUENCES

To make sure that e-mail is the appropriate choice, think carefully whenever you need to
communicate

            @™ confidential or private information
            ™   sensitive topics

            ™   complex information

People other than your intended recipients could always see any e-mail you send. Before clicking
Send, ask yourself what might happen if someone published your e-mail draft in a newspaper.

E-mail is no substitute for a conversation, or a memo or letter, that only the recipient is likely to
see. Sometimes it’s easy to throw negative feelings into an e-mail and send it off without paus-
ing to think how the recipient might react. Face-to-face interaction is vital when your message
might upset other people.

The casualness of e-mail also makes it easy to forget that it can be the wrong place to poke fun
at an individual or a group. Something that seems funny to you could offend others who see the
message. Offensive e-mails can get you—and your organization—in a lot of trouble.

An e-mail is not the best way to convey complex information, which is hard to read on a screen
and may look different in a printout. To make the document more useful for the recipient, send
complex information as an attached file that describes—and perhaps summarizes—the file’s
contents.
220   PROFESSIONAL      WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




THINK        ABOUT...
eoneoeas   ee2eoeeonneesesen




Have you ever received an inappropriate e-mail? How did you feel about it? Did other people see
it? Were there any consequences? Did it affect the business relationship?

In the last two weeks, have you sent e-mails with messages more appropriate to a different kind
of document—or that should not have been communicated at all?

APPLYING THE SIX STEPS TO E-MAIL

Think about how you read e-mail. Do you sit back with a cup
                                                                        For a review of the six
of coffee and ponder every word? Most readers are likely to
                                                                        steps, see Lesson 1:
read only the first few lines before deciding whether the e-mail
                                                                        Develop a Writing Plan
merits any more of their time. If it does, they scan the rest of
                                                                        in Six Steps.
the message to pick out the important points.

This fast reading makes it all the more important to plan your document. ‘The six steps you
learned in Lesson 1 work as well for e-mail as for any other kind of document.

Remember that communication is a two-way process: your e-mail recipients must receive and be
able to understand your message. Stop to think about the point of view of your e-mail recipients
as carefully as you would for the readers of a letter youd write.

When sending the same message to several people or a large group, ask yourself whether the
readers’ needs, interests, and concerns are similar enough for one message to be appropriate for
all of them. If not, you'll get better results by writing more than one e-mail, tailored to different
audiences. You might write one e-mail providing some background context for a topic, and an-
other short e-mail to people who already know this information.

WRITING TO PEOPLE YOU DON’T KNOW

When you do not know your e-mail recipients, weigh factors like the type of organization they
work for, their positions, and their relationship to you and your organization. Here are some
profiles of different types of recipients.
            =   Customer service representatives. You can assume they want to be helpful, know
                a lot about a product but little or nothing about your specific question or com-
                plaint about it, and receive hundreds of similar messages every week.
            m   Prospective clients who have asked for information about your products. They
                probably know something about your business, but need details from you to de-
                cide whether your product meets their needs.
                                                                 LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   221




          ™   Managers in another area who have asked for information about a project.
              They're interested in your information, probably need a suminary of key points
              rather than small details, and may lack your technical knowledge.

 Too often, we write e-mail out of habit, without thinking about why we are writing. Like any
 other business document, e-mail is far more clear—and gets better results—when you determine
 your purpose before writing.

 To get the most important information across quickly and clearly for a reader skimming your
 e-mail, decide on your single, main point; frame it as a key sentence; and put it at the beginning.
 Expand on your main point with facts and ideas. As you write, stop and think about exactly
 what information a reader needs. For an e-mail to be useful, your information should answer all
 the reader’s questions—and only those questions. In a document as brief as an e-mail, it’s espe-
 cially important to group your points into logical categories that facilitate skimming.

 Together, these steps will leave the recipients of any e-mail you write with a complete, coherent
 message that accomplishes your purpose.

 LAUNCHING        YOUR MESSAGE

 E-mail can save us a lot of time, but it raises concerns that don't come up in other business
 documents:
          ™   How do! make sure my message conveys the right tone?
          =   How can I format my e-mail to be easy to read?
          #   Do [always have to use a salutation? A closing? Complete sentences?
          ®   Do my punctuation and grammar have to be perfect?
          @   What should be on the subject line?

  These questions don’t have quick and easy answers. But the tips and techniques on the following
_ pages will help you send e-mail that achieves your goals and meets your readers’ needs.

 READ FOR SENSE


Keep yourself in the recipient’s shoes, and read through your e-mail before sending it. Make any
  necessary changes to the content of the message right away, before worrying about the format-
  ting, subject line, or other components. If there is any unnecessary information, delete it. If you
_ forgot anything essential, add it.
222   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Stop yourself if you find yourself rewriting the message, moving things around, or adding a lot
of new information. Remember your purpose, audience, and main point, and the questions the
e-mail needs to answer.


When you read for sense, also check the tone. Is the e-mail too abrupt? Too casual? Too formal?
Not friendly enough?
       ABRUPT:                   Get me the revisions by Thursday.
       POLITE:                   Please be sure to get me the revisions by Thursday.
       POLITE:                   I would appreciate your getting me the revisions by Thursday.
       CASUAL:                   Got a lot on my plate right now—not sure I can take on a new gig.
       PROFESSIONAL:             I’m very busy at the moment, and I’m not sure I can take on a new
                                 project.

       FORMAL:                   Prior to July 23, payments can be sent only through the Postal Service.
                                 Subsequent to that date, payments must be made through our website.
       FRIENDLY:                 Before July 23, you can make payments only by mail. After July 23, you
                                 can make payments on our website.

Dont use all-capital or all-lowercase letters. They are hard to read and, respectively, sound either
too demanding or too casual.

MAKE     THE E-MAIL EASY TO READ


How easily can you follow this e-mail message?

              Hi, Laura,

             The total contribution you’ve made for this tax year is $7,200. The
             maximum contribution for the year is $11,000 plus an additional
             $1,000 if you are age 50 or older. If Craig wishes to contribute the
             maximum, he can contribute $4,800 for the rest of the year (12,000
             less 7,200 = 4,800).

             If he can get the Salary Reduction Agreement form to me by Tuesday
             we can take advantage of the last three months in this tax year
             (4,800 divided by 3 = $1600). Next year’s maximum is $12,000 plus
             an additional $2,000 if age 50 or older. Our tax year begins with the
             December pay period (the check that’s issued on January 1.) | hope
             this information is helpful.

              Best wishes,

              Pierre
                                                                LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   223




Pierre clearly didn’t think about how that message would look on a computer screen—or on a
handheld device. Even though the message is well written, it takes effort to understand it.

Notice how much easier the message is to read when it’s broken down into short paragraphs,
with a blank line between each one:

            Hi, Laura,

            The total contribution you’ve made for this tax year is $7,200. The
            maximum contribution for the year is $11,000, plus an additional
            $1,000 if you are age 50 or older.

            If Craig wishes to contribute the maximum, he can contribute $4,800
            for the rest of the year ($12,000 less $7,200 = $4,800). If he can get
            the Salary Reduction Agreement form to me by Tuesday, we can take
            advantage of the last three months in this tax year ($4,800 divided by
            3 = $1,600).

            Next year’s maximum is $12,000 plus an additional $2,000 if you are
            age 50 or older. Our tax year begins with the December pay period
            (the check that’s issued on January 1).

            | hope this information is helpful.

            Best wishes,

            Pierre



               CAN A PARAGRAPH             BE ONLY ONE SENTENCE              LONG?

_ Sure it can. One-sentence paragraphs are fine in e-mail messages, as long as the sentence
 - communicates a complete thought.

               Mark,

               As you asked, I'll make the necessary changes to the project
               timetable and send you a revised calendar by next Friday.

               Deanna




               Marketing Team,

               We’ve scheduled the telephone meeting for 10:30 a.m. tomor-
               row, May 3.

               Billy
224   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




If a message is clearly written and presented, the reader should be able to grasp the important
information by quickly scanning it.

Keep these points in mind:
         B   Short sentences and paragraphs are
             easier to read than long ones                             Use short sentences how

         H   Lists are easier to read than sentences                   paragraphs, and bullet points to :
             and paragraphs                                            convey information in your e-mail.
                                                                       See pages 38, 43, 73, and 179-80 for
         &   Information is easier to follow when                           :        :
                                                                       more information.
             there’s space between list items and
             paragraphs

SALUTATIONS

E-mail doesn't always need to follow the same rules as formal business correspondence. But a
salutation or greeting is like saying “Hi” or “Hello” when you begin a conversation. It helps you
         @   establish a personal contact by using the reader's name
         ®@ assure readers that the e-mail is meant for them
         #   set the tone


Salutations or greetings can be formal or informal, depending on the situation. If you're writing
to a group, sometimes all you need is “Hi” or “Hello,” followed by the first line.


SHOULD       I INCLUDE         A SALUTATION?


You should usually use a salutation. You can leave it off when you are holding an extended back-
and-forth e-mail exchange, and sometimes when you are providing a brief answer to a question.
But an e-mail that begins without so much as “Hi” can seem abrupt.

Your company policy might include guidelines for determining which kind of salutation to use.
Otherwise, you can use the ones that follow.
              Dear Mr. Wolinsky,             Hi, Bob,                Dear Bob,         Hello, Bob,

              Bob,                           Dear clients,           To my clients:    Hi, team,

              Hi, everyone,                  Hello, associates
                                                                  LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   225




  COMMAS       IN SALUTATIONS?


  These days, people often omit the comma between the “Hi” or “Hello” and the person's name for
  informal salutations:

                 Hi Bob,

                 Hi, Bob,


  Either form is okay. Be sure, however, to use the comma after the person’s name.

  You usually need a formal salutation (“Dear . .”) only for people outside your organization.
  But there are exceptions. If you're writing to someone who is senior to you, such as a director
  or chairman of the board, it might be more appropriate to use “Dear Ms. Moreno” or “Dear
  Director” instead of “Hi, Allison.”


  Are you writing to a colleague or friend? Use an informal salutation or greeting, or just begin
  with the person's name. It’s sometimes better to use a formal salutation when you write to some-
  one you've never met, never spoken with on the phone, or never communicated with by e-mail.

- When you reply to an e-mail message, note the way the person addressed you. If the person used
  a formal salutation, you should probably use a formal salutation in return. When you write to
someone in another country, you might want to use a formal salutation, at least when you first
  begin to exchange messages. People outside the U.S. tend to be more formal in business settings.

  COLONS IN SALUTATIONS?


  A common question is whether to use a colon after a formal salutation, the way you would if you
  were writing a business letter.

                 Dear Mr. O’Connor:


  The evolving style is to use a comma instead of a colon.

                 Dear Mr. O’Connor,

  Unless your organization's style guide addresses this topic, do what feels right to you.

| THINK ABOUT...
  Seeseeoooeasseesoonseee   °




| Do you ever receive e-mail that has no salutation or greeting? Under what circumstances does
  that seem okay?
226   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




What kind of salutation or greeting do you normally use when you send e-mail messages? How
do you make that decision?

CLOSINGS AND SIGNATURES

A closing is like the period that ends a sentence—it lets the reader know youre done. Closings
can show good manners and efficiency: they let readers know they’ve reached the end of the
message. Your signature also tells them how to reach you.

CLOSINGS


Like the salutation, the closing can be formal, informal, or casual.
          Formal               Sincerely; Regards; Yours truly
          Less formal          Best wishes; Warm regards; Thank you
          Casual               Thanks; See you soon

Choose a salutation and a closing that complement each other. For brief messages to friends and
colleagues, it can be okay to close with only your name or even your initials. But keep in mind
that this kind of closing can have a rather abrupt tone:

              Parker,

              UPS picked up the package today. It should arrive by next Tuesday.

             Sheila




             Thanks for the update, Brendon—will let you know if | need more
             details.

             J.


SIGNATURES


An e-mail without a signature is like a voicemail message without a name or telephone number:
the assumption is that the other person knows who you are and how to reach you. But just as
someone you call might not recognize your voice or have your number handy, an e-mail recipi-
ent might not recognize your e-mail address or know your number.

To avoid these problems, always include your name and number. Repeating your e-mail address
in the signature can make it easier for people to find you if they’re not replying immediately.
And if you use more than one e-mail address, make sure that the e-mail address on the From
line is the one you want people to use.
                                                                  LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   227




 Depending on the situation and your organization's policy, also include all or some of these
 details:
         @   Your title or position
         @   Your company name
         m@ A fax number
         @   Your office and cell numbers, if necessary
         @   A mailing address
         m™ The URL for your website

 WORRIED      ABOUT WHETHER            YOUR MESSAGE WAS RECEIVED?

 If you need to know that someone received your e-mail, but you don't need a full reply, add a
 line requesting a reply at the beginning or the end of the e-mail. (E.g., “Please let me know that
 you got this message.)

 PROOFREAD!

 Some people believe that a professional writing style isn’t important for e-mail—that the rules
 of grammar, punctuation, and spelling don’t apply. Let’s look closely at that belief. Suppose you
 received the following message from someone you've never met. What would be your image of
 the person who wrote it?

              Dear Supplier Partner:

              | am pleased to announce: that InfoSearch has adcepted a offer, from
              Online Libary, Inc. to purchase it’s website. Marcus Wellenby, Onlines
              CEO and | have work non-stop in recent weeks to put the deal to-
              gether with minimum affects for both customers and our supplier
              partners. This will inable the InfoSearch.com web site to contine to
              operate and, give it a chance to realize it’s potential.

             | want to apologize to any of you who have had a difficulty, in contact-
             ing us while we have operated with a skeletel staff in anticipation of
             this transatcion. | also want to personnelly thank you. For your sup-
             port and for a wonderful asociation to those of you | have the plea-
             sure of meeting.

              Best Regrds,

             Suzanne Boyles


Chances are, you wouldn't take Suzanne’s message very seriously. After all, how credible is some-
 one who can’t take the time to write a message without glaring errors, or doesn't know how?
228   PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




We think error-free e-mail is important. Remember these key points:
         ™   The e-mail you write conveys a particular image to your readers. If your grammar,
             punctuation, and spelling are sloppy, your image will be, too.
         ™   Some careless writing and errors will mislead readers, or make it difficult for them
             to understand what you're trying to say.

Before sending out an e-mail message, do yourself and your readers a favor by proofreading it.
The process doesn't take long, and it can go a long way towards promoting a positive, profes-
sional image of you and your organization.

ATTACHMENTS

Always tell your readers whenever you attach a file to your e-mail. Otherwise, they might delete,
forward, or save the message before noticing the important file they needed.

It takes time to open and read an attachment. Save your readers time by telling them what the
attachment is, instead of forcing them to open it just to find out. Also include a cover e-mail that
clearly explains what you expect the reader to do with the attachment.

When you send attachments, consider your audience. Sometimes only your primary reader—the
person named on the To line and not the people on the CC or BCC lines—needs the attachment.
In those cases, you might want to send the others a separate e-mail without the attachment.

Also, if the attachment is long and complex, consider summarizing it briefly in the body of the
e-mail message.

THE SUBJECT LINE


Imagine a news website without headlines. How would you know what stories you wanted to
read? A well-written subject line is like the headline for a news article: it draws the reader’s at-
tention and tells the reader what the e-mail is about. The subject line gives the reader a reason to
open the e-mail. It's also your first and most important opportunity to get your message across.


Notice the difference between the original and revised subject lines in the following examples:

        ORIGINAL          Changes

        REVISION          Health benefits will change on Dec. 1: Please enroll
                                                                     LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   229




       ORIGINAL             Planning date?

        REVISION            Planning Project: Is meeting on Apr. 2, 6, or 9?

The revised subject lines are compelling. They grab the reader’s attention and provide enough
information to make the reader want to read and respond to the message.

WORD SUBJECT LINES CAREFULLY. Certain words or phrases can get your message sent to the
spam, or junk mail, folder, where your reader will probably never see it. Here are a few examples:

              For your eyes only                        Opportunity Knocks

              Profit Free                               Confirmation of order

              Look at this!                             $$ HM

 Your organization might have a list of words and phrases to avoid. Check with the people who
 provide you with technical support. By the way, always put something in the subject line. A
 blank subject line is not only useless to the recipient, it might get your message tagged as spam.

 MAKE SUBJECT LINES DESCRIPTIVE AND ENGAGING. Try to use them to pique the reader's in-
 terest. The best subject lines both summarize and introduce the contents of the e-mail.

         NOT DESCRIPTIVE               Budget

         DESCRIPTIVE                   Marketing budget increased 10%

 MAKE SUBJECT LINES SPECIFIC. An effective subject line includes enough detail to distinguish
 it from similar e-mails. It should tell readers what the e-mail is about, and enable recipients to
 find the e-mail again by searching for a key word or phrase.

         VAGUE              Report

         SPECIFIC           Robotix computer upgrade project report


 WATCH THOSE EXCLAMATION POINTS. Ina misguided attempt to call attention to their e-mail
_messages, some writers “liven up” their subject lines with language and punctuation in the at-
 tempt to make the message seem more important than it is.

             Only 3 days left to apply!

             Your presence required!!
230   PROFESSIONAL     WRITING   SKILLS: A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




Anything with an exclamation point get your message sent to the spam folder. Furthermore, it's
unfair to mislead readers by conveying a false sense of urgency. Remember the boy who cried
“Wolf!” If you do it too often, no one will ever take you seriously. If a message really is urgent,
your system might let you flag it or mark it in some way. Better yet, make a phone call to let the
recipient know it’s coming and needs immediate attention.

MAKE SUBJECT LINES CONCISE AND CLEAR. A compelling subject line gets the message across
without unnecessary words or obscure abbreviations.

              WORDY AND CONFUSING                               This msg inclds the details abt nu mktg pln

              CONCISE AND CLEAR                                 New marketing plan details

Change your e-mails’ subject lines when the subject changes in a reply to an earlier e-mail. Ina
back-and-forth multireply “conversation,” pay special attention to the subject line. If the focus
remains on the original topic, you might not need to change the subject line. But you can mis-
lead or confuse the reader by keeping the original subject line when a reply or series of replies
changes the topic of your current e-mail.

CONSIDER THE LENGTH. Long subject lines are often truncated, especially on handheld de-
vices. If you can't avoid a long subject line, make sure the key information appears in its first few
words.




POSSRTHOHHRTOEEHHREEHEDREBE




How much attention do you pay to the subject line? Do you usually stop to consider whether
it accurately describes and previews the message? Can you think of a time that you forgot to
change the subject line when you replied to a message but changed the topic?
                                                         LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   231




                                 Assignment
Check the salutations on ten recent e-mail messages you've sent and received. Are they
appropriate to the situation? Too formal? Too casual? Too abrupt? How would you
change them? Write three of the original salutations or greetings on the lines below.
Then write the changes youd make.

ORIGINAL




REVISION




Look at five recent e-mail messages you've sent and five you've received. Do they have
useful closings and signatures? What changes would have helped?

Do you already have a signature file that automatically adds a signature block to your
e-mail? Do you have at least one alternative signature? If so, review those files to see
whether they need any changes.

If you dont have a signature file, create at least two that would be appropriate for the dif-
ferent kinds of e-mail you send. Decide which signature file should be your default—the
one that will be added automatically to every message unless you manually select a differ-
ent one.



If you don’t know how to create a signature file, consult your Help menu or the people in
your organization who provide technical support.
232    PROFESSIONAL   WRITING   SKILLS:   A WRITE   IT WELL   GUIDE




      4.   Look through a magazine or some news articles. Circle or jot down some headlines that
           draw your attention. Notice how the headline writer gave you a little preview of the ar-
           ticle in those few words. Write out the best three headlines below.




      5.   Look at the subject lines from five e-mails you've sent and five you've received. Do they
           meet the criteria of a well-written subject line discussed in this chapter? If not, how
           could you revise them so they would be more effective? Write three of the original sub-
           ject lines and their revisions below.

           ORIGINAL




           REVISION




           ORIGINAL




           REVISION




           ORIGINAL




           REVISION



      6.   Write effective subject lines based on these scenarios:

           Simon needs someone to volunteer to provide administrative assistance for the Heart
           Association project.

           SUBJECT LINE
                                                       LESSON   7   WRITE   EFFECTIVE   E-MAIL   233




Melissa can't attend the Verizon meeting on February 6, but wants someone to attend in
her place and take notes.

SUBJECT LINE


Grisha believes that the draft of the Clorox presentation needs a lot more work.

SUBJECT LINE

Do you regularly send e-mail to groups? Review the distribution list for at least one of
those groups. Add or remove addresses to make sure that the right people—and only the
right people—get those messages.
234
                                                                                                235



 RESOURCES CONSULTED AND RECOMMENDED                        FOR CONTINUED LEARNING

The Chicago Manual of Style. 15th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Einsohn, Amy. The Copyeditor’s Handbook: A Guide for Publishing and Corporate
   Communications, with Exercises and Answer Keys. Berkeley: University of California Press,
   2006.

Fogarty, Mignon. Grammar Girl: Quick and Dirty Tips for Better Writing.
   http://grammar.quickanddirtytips.com.

Merriam-Webster’ Collegiate Dictionary. 11th ed. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc., 2005.

Straus, Jane. GrammarBook.com. http://grammarbook.com.

Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations. 7th ed.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.

Williams, Joseph M. Style: The Basics of Clarity and Grace. 3rd ed. New York: Pearson Longman,
   2009.
236




ABOUT WRITE IT WELL

Write It Well began in 1979 as Advanced Communication Designs, Inc., a training company that
specialized in helping people communicate more clearly.

Our focus has always been on providing practical information, techniques, and strategies that
people can use immediately. Individuals, teams, training specialists, and instructors in corpora-
tions and businesses of all sizes, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, and colleges and
universities all use our books and training programs.

The Write It Well series currently includes the self-paced training workbooks Professional
Writing Skills, How to Write Reports and Proposals, Grammar for Grownups, and Writing
Performance Reviews. For more about our company and detailed descriptions of our publica-
tions, visit our website, www.writeitwell.com.




ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Natasha Terk is the author of Writing Performance Reviews: A Write It Well Guide and the co-
author of E-Mail: A Write It Well Guide. As the president of Write It Well, she leads the firm’s
business operations and strategy.


Natasha holds master’s degrees from the University of San Francisco and the University of
Manchester, UK. She served as a program officer at the Packard Foundation and as a manage-
ment consultant with La Piana Consulting, and serves on the board of the Ronald McDonald
House of San Francisco.

Natasha has taught business writing at the University of California, Berkeley. She leads on-
site and online webinars and workshops for clients including Hitachi Data Systems, Hewlett
Packard, Granite Construction, National Semiconductor, and the Port of Oakland. Natasha gives
keynote speeches and presentations on business communications at seminars and large confer-
ences. She develops job-relevant, engaging training solutions that help people work more effec-
tively and efficiently.
                                             \


    F
                                            7=

                 3                                   -
             £                         es




    Pd
                                            —
         -           —           ae




                         —            =-     J




                             =                   a




=
—"
i/
    It’s very importanttowrite clearly, concisely, and professionally ifyou want to be competitive
    in today’s business environment. I consider this book to be one of my essential sales tools.
                                                 AMANDA NOGUERA, Regional Sales Director
                                        AVOKE Caller Experience Analytics, BBN Technologies

    Most of our employees — engineers, developers, product managers, marketing staff — were
    never taught how to write professionally. They were just thrown into it. This book offers people
    what they need to get their point across clearly and present a professional image of themselves
    and of our corporation in everything they write.
                                      je      KiNG, Director, Worldwide Marketing Operations
                                                           National Semiconductor Corporation


    The book's for anyone, really. It answers many of our everyday writing questions in simple
    language without getting bogged down by daunting grammar and style rules. And it offers
    clear plans of action for those who might get overwhelmed by the writing process.
    I wish I could get each and every one of our reporters to read Professional Writing Skills. .
    Even as trained writers, they could benefit from its useful and easy-to-remember tips.
                                             MICHELLE MEYERS, Associate Editor, CNET News




  Professional Writing Skills: AWrite It Well Guide leads you through Write It Well’s
  time-tested, six-step planning process for any business writing. The process
_ will help you write business letters, e-mail, and other documents that persuade
  and inform - clearly, concisely, and professionally. This new edition provides
  more tips and tools for writing better e-mail, as well as expanded sections
  on grammar and punctuation — great for learning and for reference.



                  Natasha Terk, President of Write It Well, is the author of Performance Reviews:
                  A White It Well Guide and the co-author ofE-Mail: AWrite It Well Guide. She leads
                  the firm’s operations and strategy and develops books, workshops, webinars,
                  and facilitator guides that provide practical, relevant information, techniques,
                  and strategies that people can use immediately to improve business communication.

    Write It Well (formerly Advanced Communication Designs)          ISBN: 978-0-9824
    was founded in 1980 to help people in the workplace
    communicate clearly and work together effectively.


    Visit us at www.writeitwell.com
a                                                        a            780982    447116