chapter 6, and with ideology, since ideo-
logical discourses “work more through selective attention than through
outright suppression” (Rosaldo 87). As discourse workers interpret and
act upon information as it moves between workplace and larger cul-
tures, the representations that they make to themselves of their rela-
tionships to their conditions of existence are always at work, and it be-
hooves us all, as writers and researchers, to probe interplays between
these representations and such intermediation.
    Concerning the effects of organizational authorship on larger cul-
tures and professional writers’ roles in these effects, Mary Beth Debs
offers one scenario:

      In writing, for example, about new products or policy decisions, the writer
      is acting as a spokesperson for the organization in transcribing what is,
      in effect, a preexisting reality (the product or policy developed by the or-
      ganization): It is the company’s message and to a large extent the organ-
      ization’s vision or knowledge that the writer is sending. (166)

In characterizing a writer’s work as “transcribing . . . a preexisting
reality,” Debs sketches a scenario of cultural inscription, of mediation
between the organizational and the discursive effected by writers. Her
selection of “products” as example might prompt us to muse upon the
organizational products and kinds of writing discussed in chapter 5.
Though products such as editorial pages and recruitment brochures
might seem relatively innocuous, inquiries into the ways in which such
products represent internal realities and position external audiences
with respect to these realities by course researchers Jen and Hart, re-
                             REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   157


spectively, reveal the construction of a variety of relations between
organizational cultures and the larger cultures in which they are lo-
cated. In the case of a job announcement newsletter, audiences are
positioned as protégés of the organization; in the recruitment bro-
chures, as young scholars enamored with tradition yet desiring change.
As intermediary agents between organizations and audiences, writers
shape these relations and monitor them to ensure their success—which
in turn guarantees the solvency of the organization. And if we take
relationality as a generative topic in studies of cultural construction and
reproduction, we can ask ourselves how the relations that get shaped
through this mediation among cultures might become in turn foci for
inquiry in the ideological plane: how do the subject positions offered
to audiences through an organization’s discursive representations re-
verberate through larger cultures? What conditions of existence do they
imply and where do these conditions fit in systems of value within or-
ganizations and beyond them?
    In the discursive shards of chapter 5 alone, dozens and dozens of
representations, attendant positions, and relations among them are
suggested; other archaeologies would produce hundreds more. In the
domain of professional authorship, the relations thus established be-
come topics for critique in the ongoing progress of workplace cultures
and critical topics for culture members striving to maintain the solvency
of the organization. In this sense, the roles of “advocate” and “me-
diator” suggested by scholars in professional writing seem vital, since
these roles focus explicitly on the circuits of discursive output and feed-
back and the knowledge that can be constructed in these circuits. These
roles should prompt writers to nurture expertise in demographic in-
terpretation as it can feed such knowledge, to draw on circuits partic-
ular to, say, government writing that position the public as primary
audience reached through complex mediation, and to envision com-
posing for multiple and serial audiences as constructions of self and
other—to recall earlier comments by ethnographic theorist James Clif-
ford and composition theorist Louise Phelps.
    Such constructions of knowledge in the domain of professional
authorship will dovetail with knowledge of oneself as a member of a
professional class in formation as discussed in chapter 6 and with self-
knowledge as a writer whose subjectivity is an in-process construction
amid the discursive structures and practices of given workplace cul-
tures. To enhance this knowledge, writers, as “nodes” and “links”
between organizational cultures and larger cultures, will want to de-
158   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


velop expertise in participating in on-line forums composed of other
writers in other cultures, the better to frame reflections on discursive
selves and others (see Jillian in the appendixes; Selfe and Selfe). In
representing this facet of writers’ expertise in the workplace, writers
and scholars collaborating with them will probably want to point out
that discursive constructions of self and other are not only ethical con-
siderations but considerations in the generation of a culture’s value.

Representing Writing’s Interests
In an individual writing conference with George, he told me of peren-
nial writing classes offered in the military headquarters organization
where he worked. In these classes, expert instructors from outside the
organization would review principles of style and usage and run their
charges through exercises designed to reduce nominalizations, passive
voice, and the like. The classes were fine as refreshers, George claimed,
but nearly all of the writers with whom he collaborated had long since
mastered such fundamentals and rarely wrote in the passive voice or
converted action to stasis in their prose. The reports to which they
contributed, on the other hand, were riddled with such constructions,
and therein lay the rub: problems in style were the result of cultural
processes that included regular obfuscation of agency and disciplin-
ing of inferiors by superiors through discursive intervention that ef-
faced their “voices.” (For a fuller discussion, see Henry and “George.”)
Yet because “writing” in this culture was represented widely as an
individual endeavor (albeit conducted serially in a “chop chain” of
review) and the “work” of discourse as essentially the transmission of
information, the culture’s occasional engagement with discourse in-
struction came in the simplistic form of individual tutelage in prose
style. George’s MA thesis explored this phenomenon in depth, mak-
ing provocative suggestions for local writing practice and instruction
that would make use of reader-response theory and thus exploit one
of the elements of the domain of professional authorship more fully.
His work demonstrates the enormity of the rift between the academy
and the workplace in understandings of discourse and its workings,
and suggests some of the work which remains to be done in represent-
ing the interests of writing in the workplace.
     The most immediate channel for doing so would seem to be pro-
fessional writers who circulate between the two zones. To represent
their expertise in postmodern modes of composing more fully to their
                              REPRESENTING DISCURSIVE WORK IN THE WORKPLACE   159


coworkers, they will need instruction in various aspects of discourse
as outlined in chapter 6 and they will need concrete examples drawn
from their daily work as illustration—hence, once again, the enormous
value of cultivating varying approaches to reflexive practice and to
documenting one’s engagement in collective procedures. Based on such
documentation, professional writers may draw upon teacherly subjec-
tivities to demonstrate ways in which social constructionism takes form
in specific cultures. As they inhabit these teacherly subjectivities (many
made available through discourses with which they maintain connec-
tions), other subjectivities are likely to be offered within organizational
structures, in particular those of managers.
     Lena’s research most directly addressed this aspect of professional
writing. When she interviewed the director of the association where
she was observing document processing and production, the director
lamented the fact that several of the able writers on staff would leave
after a few years, having exhausted possibilities for promotion and for
learning. If they wanted to remain with the organization, she predicted,
their only option would be to move into management. This option is
obviously at work in many cultures, judging by advertisements I receive
regularly from outfits offering seminars in organizational communica-
tions and publishing. Titles such as “publications manager,” “public
relations manager,” “communications manager,” and the like, wrought
in part by the complexities of composition in an informated age, pres-
age organizational positions in which the writer is positioned as a “man-
ager” of discursive production. In such an era, it seems critical that
we represent discursive production as already imbued with complex cul-
tural processes, local and larger, and that we contemplate the ways in
which new “management” positions can heed such representations.
     One possible avenue is through integrating our theory, research,
and instruction on discursive work with Frow’s notion of professional
classes as always classes in formation discussed in chapter 6. Undergird-
ing formations, he suggests, are ideological class relations, in which sem-
iotic constructions of the self take form and in which a sense of self-iden-
tity and identification of the social other emerges. As discussed earlier,
writers’ practices of journaling and reflective commentary on their writ-
ing can enhance work in this sphere enormously. Frow’s juxtaposition
of ideological class relations with political class relations and economic
class relations should prompt us to seize the latter as a highly perti-
nent sphere for representing writing’s interests in workplace cultures.
Precisely because workplace cultures are configured most strongly by
160   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


economic forces, we will need to point out the ways in which these
forces, ultimately concerned most centrally with the production of
value, are inextricably bound to forces and values in the other two
spheres. Now that we have dispensed with notions of writing as purely
transmissive and with discursive work as merely functional, it remains
our task to demonstrate repeatedly the ways in which values in the
ideological sphere relate to values in the economic sphere. As we un-
dertake this work as part of composition’s subject, we will need to
devise strategies in the political sphere, a central topic of chapter 8.
8   INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION
    AND REPRODUCTION

    Roy: How’d you like to go to Washington and work for the
       Justice Department? All I gotta do is pick up the phone, talk
       to Ed, and you’re in.
    Joe: In . . . what, exactly?
    Roy: Associate Assistant Something Big. Internal Affairs, heart of
       the woods, something nice with clout.
    Joe: Ed . . . ?
    Roy: Meese. The Attorney General.
    Joe: Oh.
    Roy: I just have to pick up the phone . . .
                                   —Tony Kushner, Angels in America

    Ito: The chance.
    Grace Jones: To refigure the self.
    Ito: To appropriate.
    Grace Jones: The accoutrements of power.
    Ito: To articulate.
    Grace Jones: A new identity.
                              —Dorinne Kondo, “Bad Girls: Theater,
                 Women of Color, and the Politics of Representation”




                                                                         161
162   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS




In Dorinne Kondo’s performative version of ethnography, Janice Ito,
“a young assistant professor who is thrilled with her new job at the
Mount Olympus of scholarship, Ivy University” (52), team talks with
Grace Jones as the two stroll down a fashion designer’s runway, clad
in Issey Miyake dresses and carrying Uzis. Ito is bent on academic suc-
cess yet struggling with various ideological and pragmatic demands that
go with the job; Jones is her pop idol, suddenly materializing in her
world to serve as both inspiration for her articulation of a politics of
representation and foil to her conceptualization of political identity in
narrowly academic terms. The chance to refigure the self—to articu-
late a new identity—comes to those who inhabit given identities cre-
atively, we glean from Jones’s later comments when Ito objects to Jones’s
having donned a leopard-skin suit and brandished a spear in Conan
the Barbarian.
     As one of the contributions to Behar and Gordon’s Women Writ-
ing Culture, Kondo’s essay takes up the complex issue of the politics
of representation within the field of ethnography, and the character
of Grace Jones in Kondo’s performative ethnography prompts musings
upon autoethnographic projects. As noted in chapter 3, when Mary
Louise Pratt popularized the term in English circles, she defined auto-
ethnography as “a text in which people undertake to describe them-
selves in ways that engage with representations others have made of
them” (35). To articulate a postmodern, feminist, autoethnographic
identity, Kondo’s scene implies, subjects should be prepared to engage
with the identities that specific cultures regularly offer, even if these
identities as initially offered appear objectionable.
     Such is the engagement with identity that the domain of profes-
sional authorship would currently seem to require of professional writ-
ers. That is, given the ready-made subjectivities of “functionary,” “sup-
port staff,” “ghost” (chapter 4), or even “robot” (Slack, Miller, Doak)
that are offered to professional writers most often by workplace cul-
tures where writing is represented as essentially reflective of rather than
constitutive of realities, where discourse is a mode of transmission
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   163


rather than an apparatus for the production of meaning—these repre-
sentations linked to reductionist notions of authorship fostered by both
the academy and by popular media—the most salubrious tactic would
seem to be to engage with such subject positions in order to revise them.
Depending upon the culture and positions that are offered, engagement
may mean little more than putting up with limiting notions of iden-
tity until one can move to a better culture. (This tactic has been voiced
by several of the researchers represented here, particularly those work-
ing in cultures which are customarily the most top-down and constrict-
ing: trade associations.) Such cultures will undoubtedly resist revision
from the bottom up, certainly from one lone agent whose professional
class carries so little clout, which should prod academics who prepare
such agents for their positions to investigate other means of interven-
tion in local cultures and in cultural processes.
     Intervening in cultural processes beyond the walls of the academy
may strike compositionists as foreign, but in professional writing schol-
arship such a mandate has been taking form over the last few years,
leading Rachel Spilka to speak in 1993 of “influencing workplace prac-
tices” through curriculum design and research. That professional writ-
ing scholarship should be the field to forward this mandate derives not
only from its object of study but from the methodologies that have most
informed this study. From the earliest ventures into workplace cultures
by academics in rhetoric and composition, the primary fieldwork meth-
odology has been ethnography (see Odell and Goswami), and at least
two approaches to ethnographic inquiry—applied ethnography and
feminist ethnography—lobby explicitly for intervention in the culture
under study. In “Applied Anthropology and Post-Modernist Ethnog-
raphy,” Agneta M. Johannsen notes that “applied anthropology is
mainly characterized by intervention” (71), observing in the process
that “interpretive anthropology especially focuses on the principle that
to characterize people in any way is to intervene in their lives” (77),
which has been a principle at the heart of feminist anthropology, amply
demonstrated in Women Writing Culture. As professional writing
scholars seeking rigor both in our methodologies and in our position-
ing with respect to epistemologies tied to those methodologies, it makes
perfect sense to recognize intervention in cultural processes as part of
our work.
     It also makes sense to take up the issue of cultural intervention
within the broader landscape of postsecondary curriculum design. To
speak of cultural processes in terms of cultural production and repro-
164   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


duction is to invoke the work of Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Pas-
seron, who in Reproduction in Education, Society, and Culture return
to Bourdieu’s notion of a habitus, “the product of internalization of
the principles of a cultural arbitrary capable of perpetuating itself af-
ter pedagogical action has ceased and thereby of perpetuating in prac-
tices the principles of the internalized arbitrary” (31). Bourdieu and
Passeron use habitus to characterize the ways in which the French
educational system reproduces class distinctions even when federal in-
terventions have been taken to prompt more egalitarian access to high-
status disciplines. Though their interpretations of class formation strike
one as oversimplified in the light of class scholarship since the book’s
publication, their observations on educational institutions’ unwitting
collusion with forces in the sphere of production that reproduce the
status quo are well taken. Such observations implicate curriculum de-
sign and return us once again to the realm of curriculum theory. To
the element of students’ self-actualization as part of curriculum noted
in chapter 6, ethnographic inquiry as framed in this archaeological work
lobbies implicitly for adding social reconstruction (Eisner and Val-
lance), since work at the level of discursive constructions of the sub-
ject always entails work at the level of social systems as intertwined
with discursive processes. Sidelined earlier in the century as invalid
curricular material during the Taylorization of the academy and par-
ticularly of writing instruction, social reconstructionism is likely
to reemerge as cultural forces so closely allied with Taylorization wane
in the informated age.
     As this shift occurs, composition will be positioned to take advan-
tage of it in novel ways by virtue of having taken on discursive con-
structions of subjectivity as one of its foci. In so doing, composition
commits itself to inquiries into the replication of status quo subjec-
tivities within educational institutions and, by extension, to the inter-
ventions necessary to aid students in achieving their maximum self-
actualization. With respect to professional writing, at the very least,
compositionists have a mandate—grounded in this composer-centered
field—to investigate the ways in which status quo subjectivities required
by the workplace in an earlier economic era are replicated through cur-
rent discursive practices, to strive to revise these practices, and to share
these investigations and rationales for revision with students. Primary
to this rationale is the principle that the writing subject has been shaped
dramatically and systematically by current-traditional composition
epistemology and institutional locations of writing instruction that
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   165


sunder “real” selves from their discursive representations in specific
ways—intervening, as it were, in the subject’s range of possible entries
into discourse.
     Countering the effects of this protracted and systematic interven-
tion will require diverse and equally protracted efforts, given the scope
and depth of these earlier forces bearing on discursive subjectivities.
Yet the time for such counterintervention would seem ripe, owing to
at least three developments in the past decade or so: (1) theories for ap-
prehending the complexities of discursive constructions of subjectiv-
ities—of the ways in which the social constructionist elements of lan-
guage and discourse practices shape our identities—have finally made
their ways to composition studies; (2) the shifts in our national econ-
omy, particularly as global capitalism has positioned U.S. economy,
render earlier subjectivities required by the workplace archaic and even
counterproductive; (3) developments in technology have revolution-
ized discursive circuits, opening channels for reshaping subjectivities
and for reimagining rhetorics, as Carolyn Miller’s observations noted
in the previous chapter underscore. I discuss some implications of each
of these factors against the backdrop of this archaeology below.

Discursive Sites of Intervention
The most immediately relevant discursive site for investigation and
intervention is the writing subject. In chapter 6 ideas are presented for
repositioning this subject as part of the larger project of re-presenting
discursive work in the academy. In the pages that follow, these ideas
are extended for their applications in an interventionist approach to
writing subjectivities in the realms of the individual, of a professional
class, and of virtual forums.

Individual Sites

When conceptualized as a site at which social forces struggle to enter
discourse, the “I” of the professional writer stands as a key point in
intervening in cultural reproduction. The erasure of the “I” through
current-traditional composition epistemology has been roundly sec-
onded by workplace discursive practices, judging by the reports of
researchers in this book, rendering this site somewhat inaccessible. Yet
through rethinking authorship as a part of instrumental discourse and
conceptualizing a domain of professional authorship, the purview of
166   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


the professional writer’s “I” becomes clear: “real” authorship entails
“managing” the many contributors to an organizational document (in-
cluding in some cases end users providing feedback) and imagining the
document’s ultimate effects in local and larger cultures, as noted in
chapter 7. Otherwise stated, the “I” of the real author, even when not
evidenced in texts, becomes politically and poetically positioned among
many social forces in extremely complex ways. Intervening in cultural
production and reproduction entails equipping professional writers for
such positioning intellectually in classrooms and collaborating with
them later in the ongoing processes and products in which each “I”
becomes implicated.
     If we ponder Louise Phelps’s observation on the “disappearing
boundary” between authors and audiences and if we accept the valid-
ity of extending to instrumental discourse James Clifford’s observation
that every positing of an “other” in discourse is a simultaneous con-
struction of a “self,” then clearly one of our projects in the academy
must entail assessing various discursive practices and traditions for their
potential in intervention. That is, in addition to imagining courses in
organizational studies and classroom work on students’ “I’s” as ma-
terial, we might comb discursive horizons for practices and traditions
that offer occasions for deconstructing notions of the “I” as an originat-
ing, transcendent ego. Most traditions in English work against such po-
sitioning, paradoxically, which is one reason why collaborative compo-
sition courses hold such promise. But in addition to such courses, we
might nurture course design that makes connections with fields that tra-
ditionally position writers as spokespeople rather than transcendent egos.
     Ethnography and folklore are two such fields, based on my expe-
rience in this archaeological undertaking. While it is true that each of
these fields currently replicates in scholarly publications the “major
author” mode that academic notoriety requires, they nonetheless de-
mand of these authors a cultural validation of tales uncommon in most
English studies: the ethnographer and the folklorist employ method-
ologies explicitly to this end, thus constructing an “author” who is
directly responsible to local cultures. And while Ph.D. writers in these
traditions display such responsibility in writing about cultures, pro-
fessional writers could display such responsibility while writing with-
in cultures.
     We can prepare grounds for interventionist action via the individual
writer by writing such responsibility for cultural validation into our
composition epistemology and practices. James Zebroski and Nancy
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   167


Mack have observed the power of ethnographic writing in heighten-
ing critical consciousness among students; what I am signaling is the
power of such writing for heightening collective consciousness among
all of us who convey fundamental philosophies about writing subjects
through the very conceptualization of courses. My experience in teach-
ing such a course (at the undergraduate level) has taught me that a
recurrent focus becomes that of the writer’s ways and means of vali-
dating observations on a culture. Even writers who do extremely well
in courses positioning them as independent originators of writing have
difficulty learning how and when and why to seek cultural validation
for discourse depicting a culture. In the domain of professional author-
ship, such a discursive identity is indispensable.
     Equally indispensable is an individual identity that assesses the
culture with respect to larger cultures. The politics of representation,
as ethnographers know, requires an ongoing questioning of who speaks
for whom, to whom, and under what conditions. Just as rethinking
ethnography in the postcolonial era has led some ethnographers to eye
the uses of ethnographic representation with vigilance, so might our
course work with individual writers in this tradition foster a similar
vigilance over cultural representations and reproductions via instru-
mental discourse in workplace cultures. Because the workplace culture
is always situated in our larger culture, such vigilance is not only jus-
tified but necessary. The work on ethos cited in chapter 7 speaks to
this issue, as does the burgeoning research on writers’ subjectivities as
shaped by computers. As Cynthia and Richard Selfe observe, “We are
already constituted both as technological and cultural subjects, cre-
ated in part by the machines we ourselves have created and written
continually in our discursive practices on these machines” (352). Part
of our interventionist project as technological and cultural subjects
surely must entail monitoring the contours of individual subjectivity
as technology shapes it, combating the politics of amnesia as we de-
velop our rhetorics from technology. Sharing the knowledge produced
through such monitoring among professional writers, scholars, and
other members of the workplace constitutes an intervention in indi-
vidual subjectivity as compelling as any other in composition history.
     Catherine Belsey speaks of the “displacement of subjectivities
across a range of discourses” (65), and as I scan the lists in chapter 5,
I can imagine the ways in which subjectivities are displaced across some
of the specific discourses of the workplace represented in this archae-
ology. I imagine writers encountering discourses from other profes-
168   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


sional classes and from other intellectual traditions, working to effect
meanings that the professional writer must interpret. When I review
representations of themselves as writers in appendix B, though, they
seem unprepared to theorize relations between displacements and re-
sponsibilities. If we glance through the appendixes further, we can see
that professional writers are quite capable of working within the eth-
nographic writing tradition to produce discursive subjectivities allow-
ing entry to such theorizing. Part of our work in intervening in cul-
tural reproduction should entail our working with these writers to
probe how such writerly subjectivities take form as part of a profes-
sional class.

Class Sites

My work as instructor of Cultures of Professional Writing each term
entailed constructing tables similar to those in appendix B and appen-
dix C so that course participants could see how their work compared
with that of peers and so that they might begin to glean contours of
writers as a professional class. If we are to intervene effectively in cul-
tural production and reproduction, investigating the contours of this
professional class as they solidify and shift is indispensable. Such in-
vestigations can proceed from many points of departure. Depicting the
production of all writers in a course as a set supports in-class discus-
sion of the terms of the set. Whereas I have chosen topics and themes
as valuable to a discussion of organizational and discursive features
deemed pertinent by professional writers engaged in organizational
analysis, one might equally devote tables or charts to the specifics of
whole writing projects undertaken by a group of professional writers.
Doing so would enable even finer discerning of the current scopes of
writers’ purview in the domain of professional authorship.
    Comparing organizational charts across workplace cultures also
supports enhanced understandings of professional writers as a specific
class. Inevitably, these organization charts show writers situated on the
margins of their cultures, or at the lower echelons. Comparing their
positions in workplace cultures with those of professionals from other
classes, along with study of the educational backgrounds and work-
place experiences required (or professed) by other professionals, could
enable a critical consciousness at the level of discursive formations,
which in turn might enable the envisioning of intervention in the name
of a class’s value to the organization. As an individual, it is often dif-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   169


ficult to discern where and how such values are constructed, yet as a
class, such constructions are more easily discernible by virtue of the
relations and recurrent positions rendered visible.
     As a site of intervention in cultural production and reproduction,
the professional class of writers currently offers little leverage in work-
place cultures because of its low status, yet this status could change
with shifts in organization of workplace cultures towards high value.
For those cultures seeking high value configurations to support new
production of knowledge, employing writing as a mode of learning and
discourse as an apparatus for the production of meaning, the profes-
sional class of writer could re-form with greater status and say in cul-
tural production. In his discussion of class formation, John Frow speaks
of class interests as “hypotheses, more or less rationally calculated (or
miscalculated)” (105). As a site of intervention, we might hypothesize
the interests of professional writers as they fit in workplace cultures.
Chapter 6 implies hypotheses in the ideological sphere, grounded in
the symbolic capital with which we provide professional writers and
always already linked to discursive constructions of self and other as
our composition epistemologies enable them. This capital can be par-
layed in the sphere of production when discursive representations are
recognized as a site where not only cultural capital but also economic
capital take form. The political world turns on such a principle, but
perhaps because composition epistemology has for so long eschewed
politics under pretense of neutrality, professionals trained in writing
have been at a loss to identify and act upon political agendas in the
interests of their class.
     Such work would seem to lie before us, and as we undertake it,
we would do well to hypothesize interests that heed all the relations
of the domain of professional authorship. The onus of explaining the
interrelatedness of “users” and “authors” might fall to writers in their
roles as discourse teachers, and to this end it behooves us all to take
up such topics regularly in discursive forums conceptualized not just
for colleagues in the academy but for discourse workers in various
contexts and at various levels. At least one hard-copy forum in which
academics speak to professional writers (and vice versa) on issues of
cultural production and reproduction would be a valuable first step
in hypothesizing this class’s future interests. Virtual forums will be
indispensable, both as means of drawing together writers dispersed
geographically and as means of exchanging information on the moni-
toring of cultural production immediately and at will.
170   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Virtual Sites

If considerations of writers as a class of professionals enhance our
understanding of writer subjectivities through the organizational fac-
tors introduced, then considerations of virtual sites of representation
enhance our understanding of writer subjectivities by expanding the
“organizational” beyond traditional structures. In fact, such expan-
sion may be influencing organizational dynamics in ways unbeknownst
even to organizational players at the tops of organization charts, if
Shoshana Zuboff is correct in her predictions about the ways in which
“informating” is changing the nature of the workplace. That is, even
in the absence of organizational restructuring for high-value produc-
tion (as evidenced by most of the studies in this archaeology), ad hoc
restructuring may be at work through new flows of information. The
fact that organizations already employ software to monitor employee
Internet use in a twenty-first-century enactment of nineteenth-century
panopticism clearly signals new information circuitry. Discursive reach
among workplace culture members, it would seem, has been revolu-
tionized by the Internet in ways still to be explored.
    So have writers’ touchstones for style, judging by Gary’s study of
World Wide Web site maintenance by a job bank and software pro-
vider. With no previous professional writing experience, Gary went to
his site with notions of style garnered from instruction in writing in
the English essay tradition, only to find tantalizing guidelines offered
by “writers” from business and marketing grounded in one principle:
what kind of writing invited and sustained visits to the site. On one
level, such an observation points to the market discourse that drives
many workplace cultures (see chapter 5), yet on another level, the ob-
servation augurs progressive conceptualization of cultural discursive
production that brings audience and users into the authoring process.
By bringing audiences into real authorship of a culture’s discursive
products, one might argue, intervention in cultural reproduction is
made possible in ways hitherto impossible.
    Such scenarios for intervention have existed for some time in the
realm of technical writing via feedback procedures aimed at usability
or readability. It seems inevitable that these scenarios will expand to
other domains, if only by virtue of the cultural porosity enhanced by
the Web. And indeed, major public institutions are increasing “trans-
parency” by placing documents on the Web and integrating them into
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   171


cultural processes. Though the content of these documents is no doubt
carefully screened, the accessibility might in many cases reposition
users, particularly if we think of the government sites represented in
this archaeology (see appendix B). Other possible scenarios include
forums in which outsiders to an organization might post commentary
on that organization’s engagement with respect to the larger culture;
such publications already exist in hard-copy form, of course, but the
Web offers means for collecting and threading them in novel ways.
     Concurrent with such virtual interventions that bring audiences
into authoring in valuable ways will be virtual interventions linked to
the class of professionals known as writers. Now this class can share
information among its constituents concerning their conditions of
existence; writers can represent these conditions to other writers much
in the ways that participants in Cultures of Professional writing have
represented such conditions to one another in flesh and blood. Using
these virtual forums constitutes ideological intervention and invites
contributions from discourse workers in the workplace and the acad-
emy. Cynthia Selfe proposes using forums such as e-mail in ways spe-
cific to intervention in cultural reproduction, to “support discursive
forums that serve to flatten more traditionally constructed hierarchies
in business, organizations, and governments by connecting individu-
als directly to decision makers and to the information used in making
decisions” (258), which dovetails with observations above and else-
where in this archaeology concerning circuits of information flow in
the domain of professional writing. Selfe sees such virtual forums as
part of a larger trend in the postmodern era in which grand narratives
(which always work ideologically through selective attention) are en-
feebled through the multiplication of discourses (and hence alterna-
tive narratives), which in turn offer more opportunities for agency and
resistance (285). Focusing some narratives on the interests of profes-
sional writers as a class, how these interests do and do not connect with
interests of other classes (and indeed with ultimate audiences in the
domain of professional writing), and where and how these relations
figure in values produced and sustained through local cultural work
can perhaps bolster interventions by writers in realms previously ex-
cluded to them. At least some of these narratives should be grounded
in the petits recits such as found in archaeologies, enabling individual
writers, perhaps, to link the petits recits from other locales to their own,
cognitively mapping their positions ever more globally.
172   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


Organizational Sites of Intervention
The chapter epigraph from Angels in America is in part about the
construction of exclusive realms through networking, in this case po-
litical networking between New York and Washington in the mid-eight-
ies. The character of Roy Cohn (based on the real-life New York at-
torney and power broker), facing disbarment, needs a well-placed pawn
in the Justice Department to represent his interests—hence his offer
to clerk Joe Pitt. The vituperative Cohn is dishonest, maliciously evil,
and extremely powerful, being well connected within the Republican
Party not only to Attorney General Meese but even via Nancy Reagan
to the President. As the play unfolds and we witness Cohn’s Machia-
vellian tactics, we come to realize, as does the naive Joe Pitt, that Cohn
indeed has only to pick up the phone to place a player in the upper
echelons of a major government organization.
     This representation of political networking manifested by actors
as emanating primarily from the professional class of attorney requires
no willing suspension of disbelief on the part of a Washington audience,
for our days are dappled with similar discursive scenes, be it through
the local press or through occasional unfortunate real-life encounters.
(Edwin Meese, attorney general under President Reagan during the
Iran-Contra debacle and current activist against freedom of speech on
the Internet through his support of the Communications Decency Act,
was named to my university’s Board of Visitors by Republican gover-
nor George Allen; in 1999 Meese became Rector.) In many organiza-
tions in and around the Washington area, particularly those associated
with government or its lobbying, selection, and positioning of huge
numbers of organizational players has much more to do with politi-
cal interests than with relevant expertise. Organization charts that be-
nignly depict these players and positions, never hinting at the interests
or networks behind them, offer little more than faint intimations of
the complexities of organizational authorship.
     Such were the organizations studied by 32 of the 84 researchers
in this archaeology (appendix C). Another 36 studied organizations
in the private sector, where players’ interests are admittedly tied more
closely to market demands, and organizational authorship is thus
shaped by different kinds of politics: here professionals from business
classes and others wield the strongest influence in cultural production
and reproduction. The remaining researchers studied educational in-
stitutions and nonprofits, encountering the political shaping of author-
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   173


ship in varying degrees depending upon the topics and themes explored.
Even in this last category, where the play of politics often appears most
innocent, the forces bearing upon organizational authorship as re-
searchers could discern them in just one semester nearly always sug-
gested further lines of inquiry into the interests behind these forces.
(See the abstracts of researchers in this category, along with the topics
and themes they explored in appendixes B and D.)
     The issue of interests as represented through organizational author-
ship cannot be overemphasized, neither as theoretical insights on class
formations as intricately tied to relationality of interests across eco-
nomic, ideological, and political spheres urges empirical inquiry into
the conditions underpinning such relations (see Brodkey, “On the
Subjects”) nor as scholarship in the informated age on professional
writing poses questions not easily answered in an era of shifting orga-
nizational and discursive formations. Computerized composition schol-
ars Cynthia and Richard Selfe pose such questions, and although they
use the title “technical communicators” to designate organizational
writers largely because such writers are most easily associated with
electronic composing, we can substitute the title “professional writer,”
as I have done elsewhere in this archaeology, not only to tap the valu-
able scholarship coming from technical writing but also because the
titles are often used synonymously and interchangeably in organiza-
tional settings. Selfe and Selfe ask:

    To whom are technical communicators responsible? Their corporate
    employers? The public who uses the corporation’s products? The pro-
    fessional societies to which they belong? Who is responsible for the in-
    formation that technical communicators produce? Who controls the in-
    formation technical communicators produce? Why is this so? Whose
    interests are being served in controlling information and in defining the
    various roles and responsibilities of technical communicators in the way
    that we now do? (330)

As inscribers of cultures, managing organizational writing in the do-
main of professional authorship, professional writers are responsible
to large numbers of people in ways that are occluded by current roles
and responsibilities as configured in most organizational settings.
Hence we are not only justified in claiming rights to interventions by
professional writers and their discursive collaborators in cultural pro-
duction and reproduction, we are obligated—even impelled—to do so
in the interest of knowledge both theoretical and utilitarian in an era
174   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


of changing discursive and organizational formations. Deborah Brandt
observes ways in which literacy is always multiply “sponsored,” not-
ing that different kinds of sponsorship construct subjects differently.
If we revisit the sites discussed in chapter 3 and the work and posi-
tions documented in them for the ways that literacy sponsorship is
already shaping subjects, we can imagine interventions (and can hy-
pothesize class interests) to form new unities from this earlier archaeo-
logical work, as follows.
     In commercial organizations (see appendix C), part of writers’
work should entail a philosophical situating of the local culture vis-à-
vis larger cultural trends, as writers manage implied authorship. The
philosophy invoked would be one not only of ethics and civic human-
ism (see Thomas Miller) but also of pragmatism, as the local culture
seeks optimum articulations with norms and values evidenced in larger
and exterior cultures. Even in businesses such as public relations firms,
whose sole raison d’être is the discursive representations of outside
clients, organizational authorship entails negotiating these represen-
tations in consumer cultures. Because such cultures are always imbued
with mediations of representations emanating from other sources, the
professional writer must select and deploy clients’ representations ju-
diciously. Otherwise stated, the writer engages in ideological work, and
intervention in such work entails at the very least theorizing the terms
of selection and deployment.
     As an example, Ann, who works as a writer for a public relations
firm, extended her work in Cultures of Professional Writing into an
MA thesis, in which she explored the processes whereby an all-female
business shaped the voices of all-male clients for various media. Her
inquiry naturally took her to feminist theory and works such as Belenky
et al.’s Women’s Ways of Knowing in order to depict the kinds of
knowledge about discursive forms that she and her colleagues had built
over the years and to contrast this knowledge with that of their cli-
ents. Part of their work entailed teaching their clients about discursive
features in the realm of public relations, and herein lies great potential:
as we collaborate with such writers through academic liaisons, the
theories we harken to imply specific kinds of responsibilities, relation-
ality, and alliance with other groups, defined in part by professional
class and also by gender, race, and other traits.
     The interests of such groups might enter the domain of professional
authorship via the circuits open to users, consumers, and other audi-
ences implicated in organizational authorship. As such, interventions
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   175


by professional writers may well entail taking the position of “advo-
cate” cited earlier. If we recall Jeff’s discovery through his interviews
with engineers that technical editors in his culture were unwittingly un-
dermining the engineers’ authority by unstringing noun strings, we can
imagine future scenarios in which those noun strings might indeed need
to be unstrung for interpretation by a nonengineering audience. In the
role of advocate for audiences (and end users), his editing work could
even entail pursuing questions and objections raised in their interests
(or that he would anticipate in their interests) within the organization.
     Alongside the role of advocate might be considered the role of
lookout—as writers positioned as nodes or links with extraorgani-
zational cultures scan discursive horizons for information and knowl-
edge that shapes the local culture. Starla’s job of clipping daily news
items she deems relevant to her organization represents a form of in-
tervention with great potential, depending upon the ways in which
organizations position these writers in information flows and the ways
in which educational institutions prepare them intellectually.
     Professional writers might also intervene in those cultural processes
that are more self-contained within an organization. Some research-
ers in business cultures studied in this archaeology have already done
so, either literally through discursive intervention or philosophically
through themes addressed in their organizational analysis: Nyck com-
posed formal policy regarding employees’ duties and rights and had it
instituted at his office, and Red harkened in his ethnography to news-
paper industry traditions being scuttled at his newspaper through the
introduction of time clocks for reporters. Rex noted ways in which
discursive practices reinforced certain organizational structures at his
site of study, thus implying possible interventions by writers should
those structures support counterproductive values, and Lisa similarly
identified a reproduction of cultural values through discursive prac-
tice. In her final ethnography, she states: “Since discursive practice is
defined as rationalizations used for the production of meanings, it
would then follow that the editing process is yet another set of ratio-
nalizations for rationalizations previously constructed (the written
text)” (12).
     We can imagine similar conceptualizations of intervention in gov-
ernment agencies and institutions as depicted in appendix C. Seeing
these conceptualizations through to realization might prove more dif-
ficult, given the frequent layers of bureaucracy and politically moti-
vated decisions. George’s insightful suggestions for introducing some
176   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


instruction in reader-response theory at his military headquarters or-
ganization as an alternative to the pointless instruction in prose style
went unheeded, yet it remains a valuable intellectual intervention as
we elaborate our understandings of organizational authorship and ways
of integrating audiences into authoring circuits. Other researchers in
government settings conceptualized similar frameworks for interven-
tions in discursive practices: Helen through her analysis of magazine
editors’ construction of implied authorship as replicating certain cul-
tural norms and values, and Gloria through a similar analysis of im-
plied authorship in correspondence composed across divisions at the
Library of Congress. Pragmatic interventions in such sites will undoubt-
edly require sustained efforts on the part of professional writers, per-
haps in concert with professionals from other classes, which is all the
more reason to cultivate connections with these classes under the ae-
gis of shared values.
     In the trade associations represented in appendix C, intervention
seems relatively unfeasible, except when writers are positioned such
as Kyle was to solicit and edit articles for the association’s publications
with a fair amount of license. But as noted earlier, his professional pur-
view as a writer was the exception rather than the rule in this category
of workplace. More often, content of even the most mundane nature
is carefully monitored, owing to the hegemony of political discourse
in local practices, and if writers and their allies are to conceptualize
intervention, their efforts would be better placed in intellectual inter-
ventions by writers in their own discursive, theoretical, and political
understandings—since in most cases they will leave such workplaces
for better employ after short stints.
     Finally, the category of educational institutions as organizational
sites for intervention strikes most closely to home for those of us with
a direct stake in the goals of these institutions. Writers’ work and posi-
tions in these institutions as depicted in appendix C lobby for inter-
vention in curriculum design and classroom practices, of course, yet
they also lobby for intervention in extracurricular circuits (see the ab-
stracts of Alice, Emma, Jillian, Julie, Lee, and Marla). To do so, one
might draw upon the work of Anne Ruggles Gere on the “extracur-
riculum,” which identifies the need for academics investigating and
teaching discursive practices in classrooms to learn from the practices
of grassroots community writing groups, formed in the name of a cause.
She says: “As we consider our own roles of social agency we can insist
more firmly on the democracy of writing and the need to enact peda-
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   177


gogies that permit connections and communication with the commu-
nities outside classroom walls” (91). Her stance is echoed by James
Slevin in terms of the very disciplinarity of composition studies:

    At the heart of the educational practice I propose is a reconceptualizing
    of disciplinarity so that its intellectual work is located in encounters with
    students and in the projects that arise from these encounters. What we
    need is a sense of disciplinary work that supports and even makes pos-
    sible these developments, a sense of “discipline” that allows literacy work-
    ers (teachers and students) in various institutional sites (academic and
    nonacademic) to feel the importance of what they do and to recognize
    their connections with one another. (160)

     Intervention, along such lines, would entail deconstructing the
philosophical boundaries that accompany the institutional boundaries
of our colleges and universities in ways that admit and legitimize in-
strumental discourse elaborated in workplace cultures. Such interven-
tions have already been proposed—perennially, in fact—yet usually in
ways that suggest the kinds of collusion in cultural reproduction dis-
cussed in the chapter introduction. The interventions I refer to valorize
instrumental discourses as topics of critical analysis to be undertaken
in the elaboration of writing formations. As such, they will position
their students not as uncritical subjects but as future inscribers of work-
place cultures, tasked with the enormous responsibility of scrutiniz-
ing the discourses and discursive practices implicated in such inscrip-
tion for the norms and values they produce and reproduce.
     To ignore this extracurriculum is tantamount to political suicide
for discourse workers, given the recent trends at the national level
among students towards undertaking postsecondary education con-
current with work. At my state university, for example, the majority
of students support themselves partially through jobs and take five or
six years to complete an undergraduate degree. Recent federal subsi-
dies for similar structuring of tertiary education in community colleges
augurs similar scenarios which, when considered alongside the num-
bers of people pursuing advanced degrees in discourse studies while
holding full-time jobs, compels us to theorize this situation. Such en-
gagement dramatically limits a person’s time and opportunities for edi-
fication in cultural issues or for civic engagement, which renders Mary
Beth Debs’s suggestion in chapter 4 that the organization has become
the major arena for public life for the individual in modern Western
civilization simultaneously tantalizing and ominous. With the increased
178    IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


speed in cultural processes effected through computers, political impli-
cations of the products of authorship can be easily overlooked, mean-
ing that whether or not we admit it, writers in workplace cultures are
engaged in political work by default. Surely, it behooves us to investi-
gate the discursive contours of this work in the academy.
     In tandem with technological developments, other cultural pro-
cesses have increased in speed, including those processes that make use
of professional writers in a post-Fordist era of flexibility. The flexibil-
ity of labor produced by recent national economies clearly benefits org-
anization players at the upper echelons at the expense of those in lower
positions (Harvey). If we are to align ourselves epistemologically and
politically with discourse workers whom popular (and academic) ide-
ologies would position in these lower positions as functionaries, then
it becomes our work to take up intervention in cultural production and
reproduction as part of our job as compositionists, cultural scholars,
and certainly as academics in professional writing. If we do not, scenar-
ios such as the one composed by Kali, based on her real-life witness-
ing of hiring and firing and enacted by course participants during a
writing workshop, could well become a recurrent tale among profes-
sional writers. Her scenario depicts a Kafkaesque culture in which
writers are fired and (perhaps) rehired so frequently through manage-
ment snafus that they are inured to termination:
      Kali: Here’s the setting: battleship-grey walls with rose flecks that are
         an attempt to add cheer but end up looking like blood stains. The
         floor plan is obviously cubes, but they’re attached in such a way as
         to resemble a maze as well. Everyone is walking around holding
         clipboards. Alan enters in a whirl, like a Tasmanian devil.
      “Alan”: Has anyone seen Mary? I need to find Mary. I need to fire
         Mary. I don’t want to, but someone upstairs messed up and I have
         to. Tell Mary I’m looking for her.
      [he exits; Mary enters]
      “Mary”: Has anyone seen Alan? He needs to fire me so I can get back
         to work. I need to get all this done before I go.
      [Alan reenters]
      Alan: Mary. There you are. You’re fired.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: I don’t want to be the one to tell you but I have to.
      Mary: I know.
      Alan: It’s nothing you’ve done.
      Mary: I know.
                         INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   179


    Alan: You’re a great employee.
    Mary: I know.
    Alan: Three weeks.
    Mary: I know.
                                                   —discussion in class, 4/9/97


Reforming Discursive Formations and Recapturing
Intellectual Dominion
In this workshop, Kali’s fictional scene was conducted as a class ac-
tivity in tandem with discussions of Dorinne Kondo’s ethnography cited
in the chapter epigraph. The workshop was suggested by guest scholar
Zofia Burr, who melds poetry writing with critical writing in construct-
ing her scholarship, which is otherwise grounded strongly in African-
American studies, women’s studies, and cultural studies. In introducing
herself to the class, she stressed that she saw the dichotomy “creative
writing/critical writing” as a false dichotomy against which she strug-
gled, and the workshop produced provocative “plays” of the kind cited
above that bore out her argument. Writers worked both creatively with-
in the approach of performative ethnography proposed by Kondo and
critically against the backdrop of a semester’s fieldwork and analysis
in a given workplace culture. Our goal in the workshop, much like the
goal in Kondo’s essay, was to shift momentarily to another mode of
composing in the interest of gleaning something about underlying re-
lations in culture. As Professor Burr put it:
    The live experience [of a staged scenario] really models for you the kind
    of problem you have as a writer to begin with: How are people who are
    situated in different places going to get into this? How am I going to
    represent people situated differently from myself? All of that. It’s all about
    being in relation. And the thing about figuring a drama, as opposed to
    figuring a poem, is that you really do think about bodies in relation to
    each other saying things that are potentially defining. (in class, 4/9/97)

In Kali’s scene above, the exchange between Alan and Mary is poten-
tially defining of the whole class of professional writers if we don’t in-
tervene to reconstruct composition epistemologies and liaisons among
discourse workers that recognize and theorize the creative and critical
elements of composing instrumental discourse. Through their discursive
work, professional writers daily reproduce (and potentially reconfig-
ure) the terms of being in relation in their specific culture, yet because
180   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


we have been remiss in recognizing such socially constructive acts for
the inscription of culture that they are, writers such as Mary find them-
selves wholly expendable. With the rise of the professional managerial
class (see Harvey) has come a construction of organizational author-
ship in which those most versed in writing find themselves most dis-
tanced from authoring by their lack of authority. As discourse work-
ers, we should seek to reclaim this dominion for fellow writers, and
we should concurrently reshape writing formations critical to exercis-
ing authority and responsibility in the domain of professional writing.
     We can begin by connecting curricular writing formations of pro-
fessional writers with reading formations such as discussed in chapter
6 to the ends of producing writers who are creative in their construc-
tions of reality via instrumental discourses and are equipped with theo-
ries and cultural awareness of the most critical sort. If I have seemed
overly dismissive of courses in which students write to an instructor
about literature and other texts, I should emphasize here that I see such
work as crucial, given the imbrication of reading formations and writ-
ing formations. When such courses are conceptualized as complemen-
tary to the constructions of writing formations rather than constitu-
tive of them, they can aid writers enormously. Indeed, invaluable work
takes place in courses with carefully selected texts and contextu-
alization that enables situating these texts amid cultural (and multicul-
tural) processes past and present. Courses such as those described by
Richard Miller or Phyllis van Slyck, in which the classroom setting is
construed as a “contact zone” in which the cultures coming into the
classroom with students become a part of curricular material, enable
negotiations of representations and repositionings in light of multiple
theories and multiple perspectives among those students. Such read-
ing formations can link with writing practices in valuable ways, as writ-
ers in organizational settings tap discursive theories and experiences
to make decisions in the ongoing inscriptions of workplace cultures.
     When scholars and educators such as Miller and van Slyck use the
term “contact zones,” they invoke the autoethnographic project, since
the term became popularized by Mary Louise Pratt in the same essay
that transported autoethnography from anthropological to literary cir-
cles. And indeed, spatial tropes have often been employed to depict dis-
cursive work under the postmodern umbrella, since one feature of post-
modern discourse is that of border crossings. These tropes have enabled
insight in particular with respect to cultural differences grounded in
ethnicity and regionality, for example, for obvious reasons: particu-
                      INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   181


larly if students from various “zones” are present in one classroom,
experiences and interpretations emanating from these zones can be
aired. But a similar task with respect to professional class is more dif-
ficult to accomplish, both because most students in most classrooms
are not yet fully vested members of those classes and because academic
structures are such that once class formation does begin with special-
ization, students encounter only students of their own specialization
and class in formation.
     It would seem that we need tropes to complement autoethno-
graphy’s “zones” for conceptualizing and engendering exchanges be-
tween the academy and the workplace in the name of cultural inter-
ventions and under the aegis of authorship in instrumental discourse.
Because the “zone” has proven a productive trope and perhaps to ar-
ticulate more easily the knowledge generated through this trope, we
might think in terms of “space,” particularly in an age of virtuality
and its forums. Working within the philosophical tradition, Jacques
Derrida has spoken of a “becoming space” that Patti Lather draws
upon in conceptualizing inquiry that bridges postmodern and feminist
theory: “A science capable of grasping the continual interplay of agen-
cy, structure, and context requires a ‘becoming space’ . . . where we
can think and act with one another into the future in ways that both
mark and loosen limits” (101). Forming such a space, against the work
of this archaeology and in pursuit of bringing to organizational au-
thorship the theoretical and pragmatic attention it deserves, would
require players from both academic and workplace contexts construct-
ing theories of practice that explore the interplay of both structure and
agency in the processes and products of authorship. Kurt Spellmeyer
has asked, “Are we prepared to recognize nonspecialists as genuine
collaborators in the making of knowledge?” (“Inventing the Univer-
sity Student” 44), and this archaeology answers his question with a
resounding “We must.” Collaborating genuinely—thinking and act-
ing with one another—will of a necessity entail inspecting the terms
of “being in relation” of which Zofia Burr speaks, which should push
us relentlessly—as members of the class of discourse workers—towards
mapping the continual interplays among the ideological, productive,
and political spheres shaping our being and in which cultural values
take form.
     Tony Bennett has spoken of “strategic interventions within the
operating procedures and policy agendas of specific cultural institu-
tions” (32), and while he is thinking more of interventions among
182   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


players from a variety of professional classes usually positioned in more
powerful positions than writers in organizations, his appeal applies to
professional writers in their day-to-day inscriptions of culture. As we
take steps to enhance the theorizing of and ongoing empirical research
in organizational authorship and as we conceptualize new reading and
writing formations to prepare discourse workers for their positions, we
would do well to acknowledge the lack of political impetus to act that
we have provided to date. Such a lack looms large, given the degree to
which we have shaped political interpretations in reading formations
in recent years. Kondo’s play is illustrative: the character of Janice Ito
is invited by Grace Jones to try on the accoutrements of power, which
we realize can be little more than a temporary fitting for Ito in current
political arenas. Compared with the character of Roy Cohn in Kush-
ner’s play, at least, the real political clout of Ito is negligible.
     As for Cohn, he is facing not only disbarment but also his impend-
ing death, though he refuses to admit it. He has contracted AIDS
through homosexual sex, we glean, yet he forbids his doctor during
the diagnosis (under threat of destroying the doctor’s practice) even
to pronounce the word “homosexual,” since such a representation of
Cohn in his circles of power would mean his undoing. Thus Angels in
America informs us not only about political networking to construct
and maintain realms of exclusion but also about the politics of repre-
sentation. Reading the play in 2000, in the age of protease inhibitors
that offer extended life until perhaps even a cure for AIDS is found
for people infected with HIV, we remember the early years of the plague
in which the play is set and the pointed refusal of the Reagan admin-
istration to respond quickly to this disease. Gay interpretations of this
refusal point to the equation of AIDS with homosexuals in the mid-
eighties and long-standing homophobia in the Republican Party which
condoned gay genocide through selective inattention. Had interven-
tions in research, treatment, and education occurred earlier, such in-
terpretations argue, many who have died might still be among us, and
the epidemic that now sweeps the world might have been mollified.
     The character of Cohn illustrates a particular kind of politics of
representation, in which personal gain or the gain of a select group is
inordinately augmented by blocking comprehensive and multidimen-
sional interpretations of social facts. Such interpretations have long
been at the core of feminist theory, African-American studies, gay stud-
ies, cultural studies, and others, yet the power suggested through such
reading formations hasn’t been connected with writing formations. One
                       INTERVENING IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION   183


of the reasons for this failure is that for all of the work in the ideologi-
cal sphere, the political sphere has been pretty much ignored—while
the sphere of production is positioned as some kind of afterlife to which
academics have neither interest nor purview. In so doing, composi-
tionists have repeated an “innocence about power” (Berlin, Rhetorics
80) which has consistently plagued composition epistemologies. Yet
when we rethink ideological constructions of authorship through the
ages and institutional enactments of composition that relay current-
traditional epistemology, the spheres of production and politics loom
as terribly neglected elements in the approach to discursive construc-
tions of subjectivity. Surely one solution to this problem is through the
establishment of a political action arm of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication, as Sharon Crowley argues (240).
     One of the effects of the institutional departmentalization of com-
position into English earlier in the century, to recall the argument in
chapter 1, was that the relationship of mentor between professors and
students was severely undermined, since professors now found them-
selves with so many students from outside of their field and the pro-
fessorate was being pushed towards research in the academic rationalist
tradition—that is, publications on their own topics of interest, often
rarified and esoteric—thus limiting energy and time that could be in-
vested in mentoring. As we refashion composition epistemology and
imagine new institutional forms adequate for apprehending the com-
plexities of organizational authorship, certainly we will want to redress
this positioning of professor and students. Probably the identity of
“mentor” will prove inadequate, since student writers (who will of-
ten be simultaneously workplace writers) will be bringing experiences
and expertise into the classroom which will in fact constitute much of
the curriculum—and so we must seek new relationships adequate to
our task.
     We will want to seek new relationships (and alliances) with stu-
dents and professors from other professional classes, too, given that
many of these people are deeply implicated in discourse work, in spe-
cific ways owing in part to their disciplining, in part to the contexts,
and in part to the contours of the classes in formation to which they
belong. Occasions for many other kinds of archaeological digs will
present themselves, and it behooves us to nurture them as they might
enable writers to act in their workplace cultures with greater and
greater sophistication and political savvy. If, with Branden and with
all other discourse workers with whom we explore organizational au-
184   IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS


thorship we seek to foster a critical relationship with our own dis-
course, we will need to explore relentlessly the ways in which individual
discourses meet with structures and practices in situ. Not to do so is
to succumb to reductionist ideology in our own fields and by extension
in our own lives. When we imagine the becoming spaces that we will
create to mark and loosen discursive limits, we might take one archaeo-
logical shard as talisman, Leigh’s comment that she “always wants
writing to be part of her life” (appendix B), a life, like all of our lives,
that will be increasingly composed by the workplace cultures that writ-
ers write.
APPENDIXES

WORKS CITED
INDEX
Appendix A
RESEARCHERS’ PROFESSIONAL WRITING BACKGROUNDS
Organizational Print Publications (including editors, copy editors,
editorial assistants)
    1993: Bernie, Challie, Itsy, Jan, Kolar, Nancy
    1994: Hart, Jen, Leigh
    1995: Brenda, Daisy, Grace, Helen, Karla, Kelly, May, Phoebe, Tess
    1996: Diane, Holly, Kyle, Nyck, Starla, Sue
    1997: Adam, Chet, Corinne, Lena, Maggie, Mary
    1998: Heather, Jackie
    1999: Anita, Ella, Ginger, Jane, Meg

Public Relations/Policy
    1994: Ann
    1995: May
    1996: Andrew, Ray
    1997: Carolyn, Lena
    1998: Kirsten

Technical Writing/Technical Editing (includes Web site design and writing)
    1993: Ellie, Jeff, Joe, Rex
    1995: Sarah, Tom
    1996: Albert, Norma
    1997: Ana, Carolyn, Chet, Kali
    1999: Adria, Anita, Amy, Joanne, Leathe

Analysis Writing and Correspondence
    1993: George, Lisa, Mandy
    1994: Cass, Hart, Liz, Rachel
    1995: Gloria, Tom
    1996: Andrew, Lois, Starla
    1998: Megan, Ravi
    1999: Leathe

Research Writing
    1993: George
    1995: Gloria, Gwen

Journalism
    1993: Nidean
    1995: Daisy, Karla, Kelly, Marla
    1996: Mack, Red


                                                                             187
188    APPENDIX A

Journalism (continued)
      1997: Carolyn, Maggie
      1998: Jackie

Teaching
      1993: Anne, Lisa
      1994: Lee
      1995: Kelly, Marla
      1996: Alice, Jihad, Kate
      1997: Chet, Elaine, Janice, Julie, Lara

Graphic Design
      1993: Challie
      1997: Mary

Freelance, Self-Employed Writing
      1993: Branden
      1997: Janice

Academic Writing (solely)
      1995: Jillian
      1997: Gary
Appendix B
RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS,
SITES OF RESEARCH, AND RESEARCH TOPICS AND THEMES

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Adam                    Worked as a                 Publishing         “Customer service”;
Editing                 contributing                company            morale; turnover;
                        editor for arts                                isolation, alienation of
                        and entertain-                                 department within
                        ment magazine;                                 company
                        good at inter-
                        viewing and
                        incorporating
                        quotes; good at
                        dialogue; prone
                        to agonizing; uses
                        deadlines; needs
                        practice

Adria                   Creative writing            Military           Socialization, modes of
Technical               undergraduate               contractor         communication, high
writing                 degree; technical                              turnover, visibility of
                        writing career                                 technical writers’ work
                        means learning
                        technical
                        knowledge;
                        enjoys document
                        design, end-user
                        documentation;
                        designs Web
                        pages and
                        corporate
                        literature;
                        agonizes over
                        phrasing, fears
                        sounding stilted;
                        “my academic
                        writing . . .
                        sounds strange”

Albert                  Development in              Government         Virtual workplace and
Technical               high school                 think tank         split subjectivity,
writing,                advanced                                       representations of self,
World Wide              placement                                      writer as go-between,
Web writing             English; influence                             accountability


                                                                                                    189
190    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Albert                  of college pro-
(continued)             fessor; better
                        writing when
                        not nervous
                        about risks;
                        mainly e-mail
                        now; in charge
                        of public image
                        of organization;
                        functional
                        writer—observe,
                        experience, write;
                        humorous
                        narrator

Alice                   Early develop-              Fourth-            Research projects and
Teaching,               ment; journals,             grade              multicultural issues;
academic                storytelling,               classroom          library’s lacunae,
writing                 poetry; writes and                             parents’ books;
                        reads for students                             nonnative speakers and
                        and publicly;                                  literacy roles
                        interest allows
                        immersion;
                        challenge of
                        research

Amy                     “Never thought              Electronics        E-mail communica-
Technical               of myself as a              representa-        tions, shaping cultural
writing                 writer”; writes             tive               norms and values
                        Powerpoint
                        presentations,
                        Web pages, and
                        brochures; enjoys
                        letter writing;
                        “enterprising”;
                        wants to improve
                        as a writer

Ana                     Technical writing           Military           Gender, race, and
Technical writer        for military                contractor         organizational status
                        contracts;                                     and position;
                        woman, minority,                               document review,
                        and non-techie in                              budgets; technical
                        military-industrial                            writer’s knowledge
                        complex (status
                        through English
                        degree); writes
                        fiction in personal
                        life for release,
                        satisfaction,
                        development
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             191

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Andrew                  Career change;              Campus             Formalization of
Policy and              experience in               police             policy, training,
public                  reading and                 department         remodeling of culture,
relations               writing of pro-                                control of information
writing                 gram proposals,
                        procedural
                        initiatives, and
                        speeches, in
                        addition to
                        editing and
                        proofreading;
                        would like to
                        write for an
                        association,
                        public relations;
                        grammar and
                        writing served
                        earlier career
                        (writing as
                        valuable pro-
                        fessional skill)

Anita                   A “writer-in-               Maritime           Meetings and writing
Technical               progress”; handle           office             projects, efficiency,
writing                 topics coherently,                             communications
                        in an organized
                        format; “soup-
                        maker,” present-
                        ing other people’s
                        information;
                        good ear, weak in
                        rules of grammar;
                        fun with words
                        and ideas

Ann                     Not a “writer”              Public             Instruction in writing;
Public                  (“public relations          relations          organizational function
relations               specialist”);               company            of lessons; all women;
writer                  writing equals                                 “feminine”; status;
                        poetry or liter-                               voice, vocabulary
                        ature, “publica-
                        tion”; satisfaction
                        seeing writing in
                        print; two types
                        of writing; pro-
                        fessional: news-
                        letters, press
                        releases, brochure
                        copy (creativity,
                        scrutiny, frus-
                        tration); personal:
                        proposals for
                        nonprofits (satis-
                        fying, purpose,
                        responsibility,
                        pride)
192      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Anne                    Teaching as a               Boys’ prep         Personal/academic
Video-                  profession                  school             writing, gender roles
grapher,                perhaps an error            English class
full-time               (job market);
student                 narrator
                        questions the self-
                        analysis
                        instrument

Bernie                  High school                 Professional       Topics for organiza-
Editor                  writing as                  association        tional publications,
                        expressive outlet;          headquarters       linear and lateral
                        self-satisfying;                               thinking, lobbying
                        more effective
                        form of commu-
                        nication than
                        speech; writing
                        vs. other
                        professions

Branden                 High school                 Government         Documents as
Independent             writing influen-            travel             possessions in
tourism                 tial; equates               agency             bureaucracy
writer                  writing with
                        Shakespeare;
                        published widely;
                        selling her writing

Brenda                  Developed early             Association        Magazine editing and
Press and               (age eleven);                                  review processes, Post-
professional            writing is fiction,                            its, editors’ review
writing                 a certain length;                              styles
                        finds it easy,
                        enjoyable; process
                        involves trans-
                        lating, solving
                        puzzles; some-
                        times humdrum;
                        motivated by
                        deadlines; looks
                        forward to re-
                        sponse; schooling;
                        following a
                        project

Carolyn                 Values essential—           Information        Communication gaps
Technical               must believe in             technology         between departments,
writer,                 document; enjoys            consulting         influence of gaps on
journalism              writing to educate          company            writers’ performance
                        (experience as
                        feature writer);
                        experience in
                        interviewing;
                        currently working
                        collaboratively on
                        a user’s manual
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             193

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Cass                    Excelled in                 Government         Director’s manage-
Contract                research papers in          agency             ment of projects, fax,
writer,                 high school;                                   communications,
government              writing commer-                                government
                        cials for radio;                               hierarchy, employee
                        seven years                                    affect
                        preparing docu-
                        ments for
                        government
                        contracts (coor-
                        dinating requests
                        for proposals;
                        memos, board
                        reports, research
                        ideas); pursuing
                        MA in teaching
                        of writing and
                        literature to teach
                        composition or
                        technical writing
                        eventually

Challie                 More comfort-               Professional       E-mail message
Graphic                 able with creative          association        types, Continuous
designer                than technical              headquarters       Quality Improvement
                        writing; capable                               in organization,
                        yet difficulty                                 efficiency through e-
                        implementing                                   mail, performance
                        ideas

Chet                    Needs improve-              Govern-            Deadlines and
Editing                 ment in writing             ment-related       quality; teamwork,
                        skills; interest/           publishing         cooperation, sacrifice
                        passion for this            company
                        art form;
                        mediocre in
                        nonfiction,
                        poetry, technical
                        writing; have
                        “verbal acuity”;
                        likes writing
                        fiction most, but
                        earning a living?

Corinne                 Difficulty con-             Public             Restructuring and
Editing                 veying emotion as           relations          editing, perpetuating
                        an editor; investi-         office of          image, old produc-
                        gative, artistic,           historic           tion practices
                        organizer; func-            house
                        tional skills:
                        cultivating,
                        problem solving,
                        producing,
                        collaborating,
                        administering,
                        scheduling
194    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Daisy                   Journalism, news            Newsroom           “Live” culture vs.
Journalism,             releases, public            of biweekly        textbook, observed
public                  service announce-                              quietness in the field
relations,              ments, brochures,                              site, experience,
editor                  features; others’                              interactions
                        evaluations of
                        her; enjoyment;
                        writing poetry
                        provides ful-
                        fillment; dead-
                        lines; early
                        development;
                        goal to teach

Diane                   “Conventional               Education          Strategic planning in
Organization            organizer, artistic         association        “disheveled” culture,
publications            creator, social             headquarters       publication processes,
editing                 helper” (Holland);          (communi-          management vs.
                        undergraduate               cations            writers and editors,
                        training in jour-           department)        turnover
                        nalism; perhaps
                        more an editor
                        than writer;
                        satisfaction in
                        effecting results

Elaine                  When writing, a             Corporate          One script’s evolution,
Academic,               good writer (“ele-          history            academic/corporate
newsletters             gant simplicity”);          writing            views of writing,
                        needs audience              company            should/can this com-
                        and deadline,                                  pany do advertising?
                        though (why her
                        novel remains
                        unfinished);
                        juggling mother-
                        hood and writing;
                        great emphasis on
                        page one in com-
                        posing; newslet-
                        ters; emotional
                        high from
                        crafting words

Ella                    Assemble note-              Law office         Managing documenta-
Legal                   books, design                                  tion for outside client:
support                 databases, orga-                               volumes of old docu-
writing                 nize, summarize;                               ments, drudgery, lack
                        no creativity,                                 of autonomy
                        presently; still
                        developing;
                        importance of
                        proofreading;
                        adapted style
                        (shorter sen-
                        tences); creating
                        family Web pages
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             195

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Emma                    High school                 Elementary         Teachers’ and
Teaching                training in                 school             administrators’
                        “notecards and                                 writing; hierarchy,
                        outlines”; later,                              distance, tensions
                        “writer-based”;
                        still later, “audi-
                        ence issues”;
                        not a “gifted”
                        analytical writer,
                        so uses lots of
                        drafts and hard
                        work

Gary                    Early develop-              Internet job       Writing and editing by
Academic                ment (grade                 bank               “non-writers,” new
                        school); enjoys                                issues in writing
                        researching,                                   brought by Internet
                        drafting, and
                        revising; enjoys
                        poetry and
                        creative writing;
                        doesn’t call self
                        writer (“true
                        writers write all
                        the time”);
                        methodical,
                        precise

George                  Childhood                   Military           Ghostwriting,
Writer/editor           writing; high               headquarters       document review
(fourteen               school contest;             organization       procedures, writer
years)                  occupational                                   psychology, readability
                        pleasure is clear
                        and useful
                        writing

Ginger                  Personal writing            Law office         Legal culture,
Legal                   is journals,                                   drudgery, humor,
support                 poetry, letters,                               sarcasm
writing                 e-mails, classes,
                        editing others;
                        professional
                        writing is legal-
                        secretarial,
                        revisions,
                        collaborative,
                        never originated
                        by self; strong in
                        grammar,
                        sentence
                        structure;
                        “pride”; future
                        goal to be editor
                        or technical
                        writer
196    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Gloria                  Innovation, ex-             Library of         Reference correspon-
Professional            perimentation,              Congress           dence, self develop-
writing,                self-motivation                                ment, autonomy,
library                 on the job; auto-                              service, timeliness,
                        nomy, variation;                               styles
                        interdisciplinary;
                        research, self-dis-
                        covery; discipline

Grace                   Developed early             Society’s          Manuscript review
Copy editor,            (age eight); many           journal            policy and procedures,
public rela-            genres; student             publications       culture’s three
tions writer            writing vs.                 office             subcultures, history
                        literary; BA in
                        English; analyzing
                        others’ vs.
                        original work;
                        volunteering;
                        correspondence;
                        promotional
                        copy; editing

Gwen                    Writing requires            Psychiatric        Documentation of and
Medical                 much research;              research           by workers, intrigue,
writer                  writing since               hospital           surveillance, profes-
                        childhood;                                     sional development
                        schooling impor-
                        tant; literature an
                        important influ-
                        ence; family in-
                        fluences; many
                        skills; variety and
                        learning on the
                        job; thorough-
                        ness; patience and
                        understanding
                        required; seeks a
                        contribution to
                        society

Hart                    Hearing an “in-             University         Representing change
Corporate               ternal editor” and          public             and tradition, office
editor, writer          “voice of doom”             relations          status in university
                        while writing;              office             hierarchy, conflicts,
                        comparison with                                writers’ roles
                        Hamlet, The Firm,
                        The Road Less
                        Traveled; humor is
                        a refuge; deadlines
                        as motivation;
                        natural affinity for
                        language; writing
                        self withered while
                        corporate tool;
                        writing is hard
                        work
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             197

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Heather                 Switched from               Association        Writing and editing
Magazine                MA in literature            publications       magazine; isolation of
writing                 to professional             department         staff, physically and
                        writing and                                    culturally
                        editing; practical,
                        realistic, goal
                        oriented, with
                        artistic, creative
                        streak; has dif-
                        ficulty with long
                        papers, lead
                        sentences for
                        news stories;
                        “just starting out
                        as a writer, with
                        room for im-
                        provement”

Helen                   Schooling; job led          Law                Magazine publications
Editing,                her to pursue               enforcement        office, editors’ dif-
organization            professional                training           fering approaches,
magazine                writing and                 facility           implied authorship
                        editing degree;                                of magazine
                        variety; purpose;
                        artistic endeavors

Holly                   Editing while               Newsletter         Decisions and author-
Newsletter              writing, overview           publisher          ity in process, turnover,
writing and             and notes; per-                                management lacunae
editing                 fectionist and
                        organizer, needs
                        clear idea and
                        right conditions;
                        deadline helps;
                        writing and dis-
                        covery; originality
                        and creativity not
                        strong suits;
                        perhaps a better
                        editor than writer

Itsy                    Childhood                   Small              Office dynamics,
Editorial               writing; “struc-            business           newsletters, family
assistant,              tured and uni-              management         metaphor, miscommu-
federal                 maginative                  office             nication
government              writing” in fede-
                        ral government;
                        wants work in
                        publications

Jackie                  Artistic, social,           Association        Publishing bimonthly
News,                   enterprising,               publications       newsletter, staff/“volun-
magazine,               conventional                department         teer” dynamics, “news”
public                  (Holland model);                               role in a public relations
relations               work has fostered                              setting, writing style
writing                 talent in creative                             defined by roles
198      APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jackie                  nonfiction, inter-
(continued)             viewing, headline
                        writing, problem
                        solving; future
                        goal: technical
                        writing, pub-
                        lishing, teaching,
                        advertisement
                        copywriting

Jan                     Not a writer, yet;          Professional       Issues management
Editor                  writing as genetic;         association        teams resulted in no
                        literary vs.                headquarters       change in writing
                        professional                                   process, memo use in
                        writing (herself)                              organization,
                                                                       management vs.
                                                                       employees

Jane                    College experi-             City               Red tape, document
Research/               ence in visual              government         cycling; strategically
editing                 arts; “Can I call           agency             missed deadlines
                        myself a writer if
                        I don’t excel at
                        multiple types?”;
                        clinical research
                        associate; ghost-
                        writing; editing
                        children’s book

Janice                  Early develop-              Newsletter/        Business letter in small
Creative                ment; writing as            book               family company, family
freelance               therapy; penchant           fulfillment        conflicts, no second
                        for humor                   company            generation business
                        writing; enjoys                                writers
                        workshops and
                        group processes;
                        enjoys close
                        observation and
                        analysis

Jeff                    Meeting deadlines           Environmen-        Culture clash, technical
Technical               is crucial; good at         tal engineer-      staff vs. editors; status;
editor,                 organizing large            ing con-           expertise and inter-
environmen-             documents;                  sultancy           actions; noun strings
tal engineer-           prefers writing
ing company             humorous essays
                        about people
                        (“male Erma
                        Bombeck”)

Jen                     Two “types” of              Government         Purpose of editorial
Editor,                 writing, personal           employment         pages, office style and
publications            and professional;           newsletter         writing style, all
specialist              personal: journals          publisher          women, feminine
                        (enjoyment,                                    attributes, authority,
                        therapy, relaxed,                              validation
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             199

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Jen                     most clear); pro-
(continued)             fessional: job
                        writing and
                        editing (analyti-
                        cal, exacting,
                        “technical-
                        mindedness,”
                        “structured”);
                        writing means
                        expressing self

Jihad                   Identifies purpose          Fast food          Writing forms and
Teaching,               and sticks to it;           headquarters       instructions, implied
business                edits a minimum;            and                readers and voice
memos                   does not revise             franchise
                        ideas; favors
                        uncomplicated
                        language over
                        fancy; as non-
                        native speaker
                        sometimes uses
                        Arabic writing
                        approaches;
                        recent shift to
                        word processing

Jillian                 Satisfaction;               Internet list      Shift in e-“culture”
Academic                solutions to                                   over time, users’ self-
writing                 problems in                                    representation, register
                        others’ writing;
                        exploration;
                        reformulation;
                        academic writing
                        is unfulfilling

Joanne                  BS in technical             Technical          Documenting of tech
Technical/              writing/editing;            contractor         contracting work,
publications            marketing writer                               changes in technology
writing                 in computer                                    and documentation
                        industry;
                        integrating art
                        and text; simple
                        style; analytical,
                        scheduling skills;
                        company news-
                        letter; “social,
                        artistic, enterpris-
                        ing”; social inter-
                        est; collaborative
                        skills; provides
                        financial security

Joe                     Technical writing           Software           Corporate style
Documen-                is a challenge;             development        manual, representa-
tation                  diplomacy and               company            tion, users, audience
specialist              negotiating;
200    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Joe                     rewarding;
(continued)             creator, problem
                        solver (writer
                        working on
                        programmer’s
                        product)

Julie                   Lots of reading             Community          Work writing influence
Teaching,               and thinking                college            on school; perceived
community               about conven-               classroom          applications, similari-
college                 tions (academic                                ties, value
                        and business);
                        composed a com-
                        puter manual;
                        experience in
                        industry and
                        many written
                        genres of
                        workplace

Kali                    Easily adapts               Military           Job insecurity and
Information             styles; uses                contracting        writing quality, self-
and analysis            investigative and           company            imposed standards,
writing                 conventional                                   planning departures
                        skills for work
                        writing (mostly
                        factual tables and
                        charts); uses
                        speech-pattern
                        sentences for
                        personal and
                        informal writing;
                        artistic, social,
                        enterprising

Karla                   Artistic skills;            Association        Newsletter production,
Journalism,             schooling;                  publications       editorial board’s
pubs                    newsmagazine                division           intervention, corporate
                        writing; free-                                 politics
                        lancing; fulfill-
                        ment; narratives
                        of changing jobs,
                        validation; goal is
                        to write fiction

Kate                    “Solid” writer—             University         Tutor styles, writing
Teaching,               others’ estima-             writing            center services, English
academic                tion; precision,            center             department culture/
writing                 readability,                                   writing center culture
                        thoroughness, yet
                        lacking spark; not
                        a “creative”
                        writer (humilia-
                        tion); more
                        comfortable in
                        third person than
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             201

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Kate                    first, would like
(continued)             to meld first
                        person and third
                        in this course

Kelly                   Teaching compo-             University         Changes in publications
Copy editor/            sition; freelancing;        publications       process to “teams”;
writer,                 journalism; pub-            department         time, pressure; different
publications            lications; variety                             participants’ viewpoints
                        and volume of
                        work; creative
                        writing interest;
                        “painful”

Kirsten                 Influence of                Association        Publishing monthly
Magazines,              college instruc-            magazine           magazine, work ethic,
public                  tion by magazine            publications       standards, collabora-
relations               writer; interviews          division           tive and solo work
writing                 and research lead
                        the writing;
                        nonprofit writing
                        to raise public
                        awareness; future
                        goal: marketing
                        or public
                        relations writing

Kolar                   No assessment               U.S. senator’s Hill culture, press
Editorial               provided                    office         office writing, fabri-
assistant,                                                         cation, socialization
public
relations

Kyle                    Practice and                Association        Magazine publication,
Writing and             perfection (edit-           communica-         turnover, publication
editing,                ing association             tions de-          processes and
organization            magazine); edit-            partment           creativity
magazine                ing others; devel-
                        oping style (easy
                        to read, clear,
                        concise); true love
                        is humor (D.
                        Barry); e-mails a
                        favorite place to
                        write—not
                        literary or poetic,
                        but fun and
                        understandable

Lara                    Working with                Elementary         Composing school
Teaching,               kindergartners;             school             plan collaboratively;
kindergarten            artistic theme                                 difficulties, poor
                        strong in Holland                              management of
                        model; difficulty                              collaborative writing
                        in expression at
                        times; write funny
202    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lara                    letters, emotional
(continued)             poetry, deter-
                        mined letters to
                        Congress

Leathe                  Working                     Research           Culture of a “flat
Technical/              independently,              and                organization”; chain of
report                  analyzes, con-              technical          command; project
writing                 ceptualizes, and            development        cycling, iterations
                        organizes infor-            company
                        mation; creates
                        tables; writes data
                        up without the-
                        orizing; dislikes
                        proposals, prizes
                        “time flexibility”;
                        likes data analysis

Lee                     Writing to learn,           Writing            Tutoring vs. computer
Teacher,                writing and                 center             lab, evaluating soft-
writing                 reading; writing                               ware, organizational
center                  to explain, pro-                               location and conflict
director                vide information
                        at work; journal
                        for exploring,
                        examining
                        feelings; notes,
                        letters, and lists in
                        “everyday life”;
                        lacks discipline;
                        revises a lot; play-
                        ing with words

Leigh                   Professional                U.S. cabinet  writing processes,
Editor,                 writing means               speechwriters writer’s references,
government              editing other                             “idea factory”,
                        people’s writing,                         metaphors, civil
                        style to govern-                          servant vs. political
                        ment standards;
                        memos are
                        “structured
                        writing” (a for-
                        matting technique)
                        (persuasive memo
                        to boss got money
                        for graduate
                        school); academic
                        writing includes
                        hypertext fiction,
                        a struggle and is
                        revealing about
                        self as writer
                        (vulnerability,
                        flow, catharsis);
                        writing always
                        part of life
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             203

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Lena                    Enjoys language,            Nonprofit          Management style,
Teaching,               “putting it to-             educational        editors’ decisions on
high school             gether”; “scaled-           publications       manuscripts, career
                        back ambitions”             company            advancement for
                        (great novels,                                 writers means moving
                        MFA vs. MA in                                  into management
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing); likes to
                        observe, describe,
                        draw conclusions

Lisa                    Understanding               Bank               Style: marketing and
Analyst,                through writing;                               prestige; commercial
English as a            writing as means;                              loan vs. operations;
second                  writing and inves-                             family symbolism;
language                tigative skills; non-                          gender, conflict, morale
teacher                 native speakers in
                        American work
                        culture

Liz                     BA in French;               World Bank         Writing style, editors’
Staff                   MA underway to              editors            work, organizational
assistant               expand profes-                                 division’s status, sup-
                        sional scope,                                  port staff/professional
                        improve writing                                staff
                        skills; difficulty
                        with long docu-
                        ments; strengths:
                        creativity and
                        variety of style,
                        persuasive
                        writing; uses
                        e-mail extensively

Lois                    Career change;              Telecommu-         Face-to-face and
Marketing,              striving to                 nications          virtual cultures, top-
organization            improve skills;             company’s          down vs. bottom-up
memos                   writer is a                 virtual office
                        “reverse prism”;
                        “stories demand-
                        ing to be told” (a
                        narrative of
                        writer as vehicle);
                        trying to find
                        own voice

Mack                    Not a writer: not           Personal           Writers’ aims and
Journalism              paid or regular;            ’zines             backgrounds, anti-
                        enjoy researching                              school, who are the
                        more than writing;                             audiences
                        deadlines help;
                        newspaper
                        experience pro-
                        duced “journal-
                        ese” and enhanced
204    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Mack                    understanding of
(continued)             writing process;
                        telling stories to
                        teach and delight;
                        miss thrill of
                        news writing

Maggie                  Good at con-                Publications       Standards, author-
Journalism              veying facts;               company            editor-colleague
                        never writes                                   exchanges, technology
                        about self;                                    of virtual publishing
                        succinct; likes to                             processes, auto-
                        use quotes; editor                             didacticism
                        (very different
                        from writing);
                        personal writing
                        friendly, familiar,
                        unrestricted; lost
                        some creativity

Mandy                   Not yet a writer            Industry           Waste in document
Secretary               (must “produce”),           association        publishing and distri-
                        so “aspiring”               headquarters       bution; sexism, racism
                        writer; African-
                        American woman;
                        attending school
                        and working at
                        two jobs currently

Marla                   Academic and                Secondary          Communications in
Journalism,             journalism                  school             school; administration,
academic                primarily; BA                                  teachers, students,
writing                 French/English;                                parents and informa-
                        graduate courses                               tion flow
                        for credentials;
                        teaching, coun-
                        seling, creating,
                        relating; com-
                        munity ties

Mary                    Editor of college           Management         Elitism, mentoring,
Editor,                 undergraduate               consultancy        perks, turnover, (non-?)
graphics,               paper; published                               hierarchy, stress,
freelance               freelance essayist;                            deadlines
                        suspense novel in
                        circulation; jour-
                        nal keeping with
                        illustrations;
                        would like to
                        write and illus-
                        trate children’s
                        books
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             205

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


May                     Schooling                   Hospital           Public relations
Public                  developed skills                               writing, agendas of
relations/              and interest;                                  different divisions
marketing               journalism;
writing                 interviewing;
                        corporate writing;
                        education to en-
                        hance and rectify

Meg                     Business writing            Global             Monthly program/
Marketing               conveys concise             information        activity report,
writing/                messages; manag-            company            managing/controlling
editing                 ing content for                                work expectations
                        fourteen Web
                        sites; writer/editor
                        for two internal
                        publications;
                        corporate public
                        policy and gov-
                        ernment mark-
                        eting writing; e-
                        mails, faxes,
                        letters; intimi-
                        dated by creative
                        writing

Megan                   Influence of                University         By-laws, direct mail,
Academic/               parents and                 foundation         memoranda of
fund-raising            teachers while              office             understanding,
                        young; eleventh                                acknowledgements,
                        grade: art of                                  vagueness in discourse,
                        sentence                                       personal yet universal
                        structure; college                             appeals
                        major in creative
                        writing; under-
                        taking MA in
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing to sharpen
                        skills

Nancy                   Nancy: developed            Educational        Collaborative
(editorial              early (age six);            facility           document process,
assistant)              writing as per-             planning           proposals, family roles
and Ellie               sonal; sense of             company
(technical              inferiority; must
writer)                 be interested in
                        topic
                        Ellie: direct, clear,
                        logical; writing is
                        a puzzle; hopes
                        for a varied
                        writing career
206    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Nidean                  “Never boring,”             Fitness            Language use to
Journalist;             even if matter is           training           manipulate, brochures,
full-time               dry; “chameleon             facility           notions of self, gym
student                 penner”; writing                               discourse
                        ability helps in all
                        professions

Norma                   Late bloomer,               Doctor’s           Coded entries on
Technical               early anxiety,              office             patients, time, industry
writing and             stress, punish-                                standards
editing                 ment; worked
                        hard at this dif-
                        ficult skill; inter-
                        rupted college;
                        enjoys tech
                        writing most;
                        updating and
                        revising text-
                        books;would like
                        to use ethnogra-
                        phy to develop
                        freer style

Nyck                    Currently stag-             Capitol Hill       Formalizing culture
News and                nant, needs a               info provider      through writing,
information             deadline or a                                  responsibilities and
editing                 demander; gets                                 pay, credentials and
                        ideas for stories,                             professional identity
                        poems, screen-
                        plays, but doesn’t
                        write them down;
                        dreamed of writ-
                        ing since fourth
                        grade; may use
                        writing as ther-
                        apy; adopts voice
                        of humorous
                        narrator in the
                        self-assessment

Phoebe                  Ethnography will            Writers’           Interoffice correspon-
Professional            be “confessional”           organization       dence, artists as
writing,                (Van Maanen’s                                  managers, alliances in
business,               categories); MFA                               culture, upheaval
poetry                  vs. MA in
                        professional
                        writing and
                        editing; poetry;
                        “doing every-
                        thing” in office
                        writing; writing
                        as therapeutic;
                        schooling;
                        newfound passion
                        for editing
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             207

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Rachel                  Early employ-               Embassy            Reports, letters; author
Foreign                 ment; artistic              defense            credit; military
language                skills and writing;         section            structure and writing;
assistant               “knack” for                                    gender divisions
                        technical writing,
                        business writing;
                        tenacity, auto-
                        didactic; long-
                        term goal: write
                        full time

Ravi                    Taking pride in             Software           “Unconventional”
Academic/               one’s work; the             development        office management,
freelance               thrill of being             company            training, collaboration,
                        published; getting                             work dynamics
                        a paycheck; has
                        written two plays,
                        many poems,
                        travel notes and
                        essays; rereads his
                        work

Ray                     Creative and                Small town         Revising policy, oral vs
Policy and              fiction on own              police             written culture, orga-
public                  time—desires                department         nizational dynamics,
relations               more time for                                  writer as “shield” for
writing                 “independent,                                  chief
                        introspective, and
                        nonconformist”
                        writing; at work:
                        press summaries,
                        press releases,
                        memos, letters;
                        perhaps too self-
                        critical; similar
                        technical writing
                        in future?

Red                     “Descriptive                Daily              Journalist culture and
Journalism              writer,” visual             newspaper          professional develop-
                        thinker (mother a                              ment, management vs.
                        painter);                                      reporters, “trust,”
                        newspaper                                      surveillance
                        experience:
                        writing approach-
                        ing spoken style
                        and now reads as
                        a writer; writing
                        is an art, for
                        fulfillment;
                        rhythm and
                        rhyme are
                        therapeutic
208    APPENDIX B

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Rex                     Writing is artistic;        Illustrations      “Boundaries,” phys-
Editor,                 enjoy team                  department,        ical, social, linguistic;
technical               atmosphere yet              national           captioning; veterans vs.
writer                  independent;                monthly            novices; management
                        seeking new job                                vs. employees

Sarah                   Enjoyment; inter-           Freelancers        Project acquisition and
Technical               est; writing to                                management in current
writing,                learn; intellectual                            economy, isolation,
academic                stimulation;                                   interactions with
                        social contact                                 editors and others
                        (through inter-
                        views); organiz-
                        ing; ordering;
                        variety of tasks;
                        deciding whether
                        to switch to
                        freelancing

Starla                  Prefer nonfiction           Financial          Organizational
Public                  to fiction, humor           services           hierarchies; press
relations,              (Dave Barry);               company            releases; problems in
news                    enjoys writing              communica-         information flow,
analysis                profiles; work              tions              review processes
                        (other people               department
                        edit) vs. home
                        (freer); “audio”
                        writer (sentences
                        and musicality)

Sue                     Earlier days,               Military           Review and dissemina-
Organiza-               enjoyed writing             field office       tion system, office
tion editing            for writing; now,                              alliances, breakdowns
and writing             job requires much                              in dissemination
                        writing in formats
                        and “govern-
                        mentese”; others’
                        opinions are a
                        plus; lack dis-
                        cipline; moody;
                        writer’s block;
                        deadlines are a
                        plus, private
                        writing suffers;
                        writing as therapy

Tess                    Publications;               Travel             Corporate culture and
Writer/                 enjoyment; many             business           writers’ cultures,
editor,                 tasks; learning                                association vs. cor-
organization            skills on the job;                             porate writing, inter-
publications            creative writing,                              viewing for new job
                        poetry; convic-
                        tion; “painful”;
                        wants to find her
                        professional
                        culture
                                      RESEARCHERS’ TOPICS IN SELF-ASSESSMENT AS WRITERS             209

Researcher/Background   Topics in Self-Assessment   Site of Research   Research Topics and Themes


Tom                     Developed early             Community          Memos’ form and
Professional/           (age four); wants           college            function; organization
technical               and fears feed-             senate             structure and power
writing                 back; comfort,
                        loss, invasion;
                        people who
                        influence; giving
                        power; finds
                        academic writing
                        esoteric; narrator
                        uses metaphor
                        and irony
Appendix C
WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF
THE ORGANIZATION
PRIVATE BUSINESSES AND CORPORATIONS

Size*    Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


L        Adam              Compiling health care       Writers and editors in
                           reference materials         either publishing divi-
                                                       sion or operations
                                                       division

M        Adria             Composing and               Technical writer
                           updating software life      [researcher], a Web site
                           cycle documentation,        developer, in thirty-
                           corporate literature,       person headquarters of
                           Web site copy               defense contracting
                                                       organization, coordi-
                                                       nating virtual teams
                                                       around the country

L        Amy               Composing e-mails to        Sales representatives in
                           customers and               five-person office
                           coworkers                   coordinating requests
                                                       and information from
                                                       fifteen other offices

S        Ann               Public relations writing    Owner (founder), pro-
                                                       ject coordinator, editor,
                                                       graphics specialist

M        Carolyn           Composing software          Technical writers in
                           documentation               documentation and
                                                       training team

S        Chet              Producing publications      Owner (founder),
                           on government               editor, attorney, assis-
                           procurement                 tant editor/production
                                                       manager, printer

S        Daisy             Interviewing, writing       Associate publisher,
                           copy, editing               editors (managing,
                                                       feature, sports, copy),
                                                       reporters


*S = less than 15 employees; M = 15 to 100 employees; L = more than 100 employees

                                                                                            211
212    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented    Writers’ Positions in Organization


M         Elaine       Writing corporate          Historians: CEO,
                       histories                  archivists, project
                                                  managers, writers

L         Ella         Composing interoffice      Legal assistant
                       memos, client letters,     [researcher] of
                       document charts, file      attorneys in eight-
                       indexes, tables of         person team, 500-
                       contents                   person firm

M         Gary         Composing and              Marketing executive,
                       updating Web site          webmaster, technical
                                                  writer

L         Ginger       Composing form             Secretaries [researcher],
                       agreements, memos,         legal assistants of
                       and letters                attorneys in firm of
                                                  over a hundred

M         Holly        Editing newsletters        Editor in editorial
                                                  department of twenty,
                                                  newsletter publications
                                                  company

S         Janice       Getting clients,           Owner (CEO), sec-
                       promoting their            retary, public relations
                       publications               writer, marketing
                                                  writer, printer

L         Jeff         Editing engineers’ copy,   Technical editor in
                       proposals                  team of seven,
                                                  engineering organiza-
                                                  tion of over a hundred

M         Jen          Writing, editing,          Writers, editors, and
                       proofing copy              editorial assistants in
                                                  biweekly newsletter

M         Jihad        Writing memos and          Managers and
                       business forms             employees from other
                                                  professions

M         Joanne       Composing manuals          Documentation
                       and on-line Web page,      manager of staff
                       migration plans,           [researcher] in six-
                       drafting on shared         person team of fifty-
                       drive                      person organization

L         Joe          Writing software docu-     Technical writers in
                       mentation; editing copy    team of four, part of
                       from other departments     software development
                                                  organization of 150
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             213

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


M      Leathe            Composing proposals         Technical writer/editor
                         and statistical analysis,   [researcher - one of
                         Web sites                   four] in eighty-person
                                                     government contractor

M      Lisa              Writing memos and           Vice presidents, loan
                         correspondence              administrators, oper-
                                                     ations assistant, assis-
                                                     tant managers, cus-
                                                     tomer service assistant

L      Lois              Writing memos and           Salesperson in virtual
                         e-mails up and down         office of eight, part of
                         organization to             communications
                         coordinate marketing        technology organiza-
                                                     tion of over 300,000

S      Mack              Self-publishing ’zine       Independent (links with
                         issues                      other writers via ’zine
                                                     culture)

M      Maggie            Assembling books for        Sponsoring editor,
                         publication by e-mail       managing editor,
                                                     project editor

L      Mary              Team writing manage-        Specialists, managers,
                         ment studies                associates, analysts (all
                                                     MBAs)

L      May               Writing promotional         Assistant vice presi-
                         brochures                   dent, marketing and
                                                     public relations,
                                                     hospital of over a
                                                     hundred [researcher]

L      Meg               Writing internal and        Vice president, director,
                         external reports,           senior manager
                         newsletters, Web sites      [researcher], informa-
                                                     tion associate in 250-
                                                     person office of
                                                     16,000-person
                                                     information company

S      Nancy             Coordinating propos-        Technical writer/pro-
       and               als, boilerplating          gram analyst; liaison to
       Ellie                                         exterior (clients) in
                                                     five-person architec-
                                                     tural consultancy
                                                     organization

S      Nidean            Desktop publishing          Outside consultant
                         consulting
214    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented   Writers’ Positions in Organization


S         Norma        Documenting patients      Professionals in other
                       in office                 professions

M         Nyck         Scanning and proofing     Reporters, editors,
                       transcripts of govern-    chief editor, and mana-
                       ment documents,           gers in sixty-five-per-
                       putting them on-line      son on-line news and
                                                 information provider

M         Ravi         Marketing software        Marketing writers,
                       and telecommunica-        technical writers, sales
                       tions service             writers

M         Red          Reporting for and         Managing editor, edi-
                       publishing newspaper      torial editor, copy and
                                                 bureau chiefs, copy
                                                 editors

M         Rex          Indexing and abstract-    Indexers in illustrations
                       ing illustrations         division of national
                                                 monthly publications
                                                 office

S         Sarah        Self-marketing own        Niches: outside writers
                       writing and revising      (selling their content)
                       and composing             and consultants
                       organizations’            (working with
                       publications              organization’s content)

L         Starla       Clipping news articles,   Communications
                       writing press releases,   specialists, PR director
                       newsletter                in seven-person com-
                                                 munications division,
                                                 organization of over a
                                                 thousand

L         Tess         Writing newsletter,       Writer in communica-
                       public relations,         tions department in
                       brochures                 travel company of
                                                 2,300


GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS

L         Albert       Managing Web pages,       Technical writer/
                       composing copy, man-      webmaster in 850-
                       aging e-mail and voice    employee government
                       mail in virtual office    think tank

M         Ana          Writing technical         Technical writer,
                       specifications,           communications
                       proposals, status         automation officer in
                       updates                   operations department
                                                 of information
                                                 technology division
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             215

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


L      Anita             Drafting, circulating,      Technical writer con-
                         and editing short- and      sultant [researcher] to
                         long-term projects;         maritime headquarters;
                         presenting progress in      military personnel at
                         meetings                    various ranks in ten-
                                                     person division

L      Branden           Collectively writing        Outside consultant
                         reports and press           [researcher] to policy
                         releases for public,        and planning office in
                         composing internal          travel agency in
                         weekly reports, editing     department of
                         and copyediting             commerce; staff writers
                                                     in policy and planning

L      Cass              Composing requests for      Contracting officer
                         proposals based on          [researcher] in 250-
                         input from many             person government
                         divisions                   agency on arms control
                                                     and disarmament

L      George            Gathering data,             Program analysts and
                         analyzing it, writing in    writers in military
                         chop chain for officers’    headquarters organiza-
                         signatures                  tion of 400

L      Gloria            Researching sources         Reference librarians in
                         and synthesizing them       newspaper and current
                         for library patrons via     periodicals reading
                         letters and e-mail          room of Library of
                                                     Congress

L      Gwen              Writing grant applica-      Branch chief, writer/
                         tions, administrative       editor [researcher], and
                         renewals, memos,            secretaries in branch
                         purchase orders,            chief’s office overseeing
                         articles and books,         twenty-nine-member
                         statements, audio-          staff
                         visual presentations

L      Helen             Editing submissions         Editors and associate
                         from the field for a        editors in seven-person
                         law enforcement             publications division of
                         organization’s              national law enforce-
                         magazine                    ment organization

M      Jane              Composing and editing       Supervisor and editor
                         monthly reports,            [researcher] in two-
                         newsletters, magazine       person public affairs
                         articles, Web site copy,    division of fifty-person
                         letters to citizens         city government agency

L      Kali              Writing reports,            Direct-charge and over-
                         financial analysis,         head employees in vari-
                         technical specifications,   ous divisions of military
                         computer tips               contracting company
216    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented    Writers’ Positions in Organization


M         Kolar        Ghostwriting state-        Press secretaries and
                       ments, fabricating let-    assistants in U.S.
                       ters from constituents     senator’s press office

M         Leigh        Speechwriting for U.S.     Civil servant speech-
                       cabinet member             writers in cabinet
                                                  office, team of five

L         Liz          Producing collective       Report authors and
                       reports for external       editors (on-staff and
                       audiences, editing and     contractual) from
                       revising copy from         various divisions of
                       other divisions, writing   World Bank staff of
                       internal memos             9,500

M         Rachel       Composing wire reports     Civilian and military
                       and written reports for    employees in twenty-
                       superiors’ signatures,     four-member defense
                       composing internal         attaché section of a
                       memos and assignments      foreign embassy

M         Ray          Writing public relations   Policy writer in support
                       copy to exterior, policy   division of small-town
                       revision within            police force
                       organization

M         Sue          Processing and editing     Reports officer in gov-
                       reports, checking forms    ernment/military field
                       and formats                office of twenty-five


PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS AND SOCIETIES

M         Bernie       Producing four journals    Authors (outside and
                       to keep constituency       on-staff) and editors
                       abreast of issues          (support staff in
                       (writing and editing)      publications depart-
                                                  ment) in association
                                                  headquarters

M         Brenda       Evaluating submis-         Director of publications,
                       sions, accepting,          assistant director of
                       editing, and publishing    publications, and writer/
                       articles for bimonthly     editor in three-person
                       magazine                   publications branch of
                                                  communications
                                                  department of associa-
                                                  tion headquarters

L         Challie      Publishing monthly         Writers and editors,
                       newsletter and e-mail      graphics expert
                       exchanges in organiza-     [researcher], in 160-
                       tion                       person association
                                                  headquarters
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION             217

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


S      Corinne           Composing public            Director, marketing
                         relations materials for     director, managers
                         historic house              (special events,
                                                     education, interpreta-
                                                     tion, media relations),
                                                     administrative
                                                     assistants, contract
                                                     editor [researcher]

M      Diane             Writing, editing books,     Writers, editors, and
                         desktop publishing,         editorial assistants in
                         proofing; composing         five-person communi-
                         public relations            cations department of
                         brochures and reports       twenty-person asso-
                         to constituents             ciation headquarters

M      Grace             Coordinating manu-          Manuscript coordina-
                         scripts from authors        tor, editor in “adjunct
                         and referee reviews in      journal staff,” team of
                         professional society’s      eight associate editors
                         monthly journal,            and editor-in-chief
                         editing and copyediting

L      Heather           Publishing monthly          Editor-in-chief,
                         magazine                    assistant editors,
                                                     managing editor, senior
                                                     editors, copy editors,
                                                     editorial assistants

S      Itsy              Producing newsletters       Two writers, each in
                         for constituents            charge of separate
                                                     newsletter, in five-
                                                     person office of
                                                     association

L      Jackie            Publishing newsletter       Editor-in-chief,
                         for national association    managing editor,
                                                     associate editors,
                                                     editorial assistant,
                                                     photo assistant

M      Jan               Collectively producing      Senior staff and
                         perspective paper to        support in eighty-five-
                         represent constituency      person association
                         to Congress                 headquarters

M      Karla             Publishing newsletter       Editorial board,
                         for national association    managers, project
                                                     directors, writers,
                                                     editors, copy editors,
                                                     editorial assistants in
                                                     media relations depart-
                                                     ment of association
                                                     headquarters
218    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented     Writers’ Positions in Organization


S         Kirsten      Publishing magazine         Senior vice president
                       for national association    in communication,
                                                   publications director,
                                                   editors-in-chief,
                                                   managing editors, in
                                                   magazine staff of six,
                                                   part of publications
                                                   staff of seventeen

M         Kyle         Writing stories, coor-      Editor in seven-person
                       dinating and editing        communications
                       submissions from            department of thirty-
                       nonpaid authors, for        five-person association
                       association bimonthly       headquarters
                       magazine

S         Lena         Publishing monthly          Editor, managing
                       magazine for science        editor, associate editor,
                       educators                   design manager,
                                                   editorial assistant,
                                                   field editor

L         Mandy        Boilerplating, speech-      Managers and staff
                       writing, composing          support in ninety-
                       reports to constituents     person association
                                                   headquarters


EDUCATIONAL AND NON-PROFIT INSTITUTIONS

M         Alice        Teaching report and         Full-time teacher in
                       research writing to         fourth-grade classroom
                       fourth graders              in public school system

L         Andrew       Composing training          Professionals in other
                       policies and lessons,       professions, part of
                       standard operating          university campus
                       procedures                  police office

M         Anne         Teaching writing in         Student-teacher in tenth
                       high school sophomore       grade English class in
                       English                     boys’ prep school

M         Emma         Writing administrative      Principal, secretaries,
                       notes, memos, news-         teachers, support staff
                       letters; writing notes to   in elementary school
                       parents

L         Hart         Writing copy for            Editor of magazine,
                       alumni magazine,            director of publica-
                       special reports,            tions, publications
                       president’s statements      assistant and desktop
                       and other publications      assistant in the com-
                       in university relations     munications depart-
                       office                      ment of university
                                                   relations department
                    WRITERS’ WORK AND POSITIONS BY NATURE OF THE ORGANIZATION              219

Size   Researcher        Writing Work Documented      Writers’ Positions in Organization


L      Jillian           Posting comments in          Mostly academics at
                         MBU, a public listserv       various institutions in
                         on the Internet              United States and world-
                                                      wide, in various positions

M      Julie             Composing literary           Students anticipating
                         analysis, research           majors in business, art,
                         papers, response jour-       sociology
                         nals in community col-
                         lege composition class

L      Kate              Teaching writing one-        MFA students with
                         on-one, conducting           teaching assistantships
                         group workshops in           in English department
                         university writing           with tracks in literature,
                         center                       linguistics, professional
                                                      writing and editing, and
                                                      teaching writing and
                                                      literature

L      Kelly             Writing copy and             Director of publica-
                         editing others’ in           tions, production
                         variety of publications      manager, writers,
                         in university publica-       editors, copy editors,
                         tions office                 and editorial assistants
                                                      in fifteen-person office

M      Lara              Collectively composing       Principal, lead teachers
                         an elementary school         (in subject areas), read-
                         three-year plan              ing teacher, kindergar-
                         mandated by county           ten teacher [researcher]

M      Lee               Writing memos on             Director of a writing
                         daily activities, reports    center attached to
                         to central administra-       English department in
                         tion of college              community college

L      Marla             Teaching journalism,         Full-time teacher in
                         writing to parents,          public high school of
                         overseeing school            1,100
                         newspaper production

M      Megan             Writing by-laws, mem-        Annual fund director,
                         oranda of understand-        director of develop-
                         ing, biannual newsletter;    ment for donor
                         direct mail solicitations;   relations
                         acknowledgments

M      Phoebe            Composing memos and          Office manager and
                         reports on office            assistant in administra-
                         business for internal        tive division and pro-
                         distribution                 grams coordinator in
                                                      program division of
                                                      non-profit organization
                                                      serving writers, teach-
                                                      ers, and community
220    APPENDIX C

Size      Researcher   Writing Work Documented   Writers’ Positions in Organization


L         Tom          Writing memos and         Chair of college senate,
                       reports                   community college
Appendix D
RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF
WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES

ADAM—A LESSON IN THE DANGERS OF WORKPLACE ALIENATION

A valuable illustration for employees attempting to understand the dynamics of
their workplace cultures is a corporate environment that has undergone a diffi-
cult period of growth resulting in a dangerous level of alienation from others by
one or several departments within the organization. This autoethnographic study
provides the history and goals of a publishing company, documents several sources
of the company’s difficulties, and concentrates on the detachment of one depart-
ment, customer service, during this troublesome time. It is the author’s conten-
tion that conditions at the company compounded the feeling of alienation felt by
his department. Additionally, conditions inherent in all customer service situa-
tions as well as attitudes maintained by employees of this particular department
are discussed to illustrate that fault should be equally accepted by those employ-
ees and the company environment as a whole. Concluding observations provide
an insight to the future of the company and how its improving conditions could
be attained at similar organizations.
ADRIA—SOCIALIZATION, ACCEPTANCE, EMPLOYEE TURNOVER, AND WRITING IN
A SMALL DEFENSE CONTRACTING ORGANIZATION

This paper centers on the author’s autoethnographic research at a small defense
contracting organization in which employee turnover has become so bad that it
is practically a joke. The paper focuses on the relationships between employee
turnover, socialization, and writing tasks. Employees at this company learn quickly
that socialization plays a big part in employee happiness and ability to get work
done. Gossip and actual information sharing become entwined, so that a short
office visit for talking about the new employee down the hall can become a valu-
able source of information. Besides oral communication, written communication
in the form of e-mail is the most valuable source of information, but it often falls
short if those involved in the e-mail conversation have never met in person. Turn-
over itself has made a case for the need for more documentation, since so many
people leave that important information becomes lost. Finally, speculations are
made concerning the relationship between management and employees, and
opinions are expressed concerning the problem of turnover.

ALBERT—SPLIT SUBJECTIVITY IN THE VIRTUAL WORKPLACE

This study investigates the role of the professional writer in a government think
tank. The two goals of this study were to assess the “virtual “ environment in
this workplace through exploring the split subjectivity of the writers there and

                                                                                221
222   APPENDIX D

to address the dynamic nature of documents (specifically resumes) on the World
Wide Web. My findings focus on the virtual buffers now a part of the hiring and
firing process of employees, and on the psychologies of composing in the virtual
writing environment. This study incorporates the writings of three postmodern
theorists, Charles Altieri, Terry Eagleton, and Morris Dickstein, to support the
ideas of split subjectivity, virtual discourse, and the mediated values writers and
readers bring to authorship.

ALICE—USING THE WRITING PROCESS TO ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY:
AN ETHNOGRAPHIC INSIGHT TO CLASSROOM CULTURE
This paper presents the findings from a classroom study that provided insights
on the impact of the writing process on accommodating diversity and ability. The
setting of the study is a fourth- and fifth-grade classroom in an urban elementary
school. Students, parents, teachers, and administrators were interviewed and
observed in the school setting and the results were described in field notes and
written responses. Analysis of data revealed three significant points: (1) Students
come from varied writing experiences that can have different values than their
school experiences; (2) Students need to see themselves in the curriculum; (3) The
writers’ workshop format functions as a powerful tool for students to express
what is important to them.

AMY—THE CULTURE OF BEA, PORTRAYED AND DEFINED BY E-MAIL
This study is an illustration of the culture of a branch office of an electronics sales
representative. Using interoffice e-mails and organizational charts completed by
each member of the five person office, the autoethnographer contrasts the team-
oriented atmosphere perceived by office members versus the hierarchical struc-
ture of the office defined by corporate headquarters. The e-mails collected were
categorized into five categories as follows: employee conversation (nonwork re-
lated), manager to subordinate instructions, comments to the office on outsid-
ers’ e-mails, and copies of e-mails sent to outsiders to keep everyone up to date.
These e-mails were used to define the culture as team-oriented and were viewed
using a sociolinguistic analysis. At the same time, the e-mails were contrasted
against the culture defined in the organizational charts, which did not portray a
flat organization. The author’s analysis determined that there was a team spirit,
but the office was still divided with managers and subordinates.

ANA—RACE, STATUS, AND WRITING CYCLING AT A MILITARY CONTRACTING FIRM
My experience as a technical writer at “D3 Corporation” allowed me to study
the history of contracting and document review in tandem with hiring and fir-
ing. As money from one contract dwindled, employees in the lower echelons were
let go (including one critical technical support person), while an expensive middle-
manager was brought on, ostensibly for his power to land new contracts. By the
time that four of the six minority workers in the company had been let go, my
boss and I, the remaining two minority workers, felt some security—he because
he had a strong track record in bringing in business and I because I was in fact
the only one actually learning the technical intricacies of our projects through
my writing. Towards the end of this study, upper management had begun cycling
our documents to the new middle manager so that he could sign off on them and
take money from our budget. At the conclusion of my study, my boss and I were
interviewing for new jobs.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    223

ANDREW—DEVELOPING A TRAINING CURRICULUM AND REMODELING THE
INFORMATION FLOW: ONE ORGANIZATION’S APPROACH TO CHANGE
The Atlantic College Campus Security Police has changed the way it trains its
officers and the way it disseminates policy and procedures to the line officers.
This ethnography examines those changes, focusing on the training program that
is presently in place, contrasting it to the previous arrangement. The paper also
looks at the way in which directives are prepared within the organization as a
vehicle to compare the director’s leadership style to his goals and objectives for
the organization. This work unit is, in some respects, a makeshift organization,
carving and creating its culture as it goes. It has not looked at itself for the pur-
pose of determining the value of the changes undertaken by its new director but
instead relies on its intuition and experience to map its future.

ANITA—CONSTRUCTING COMMUNICATION
During the months of February through May 1999, I have been observing the
maritime military division where I have been employed for three years. The data
used for this ethnography include two sets of interviews with each division mem-
ber, minutes from weekly division meetings, personal observations as both a
participant and ethnographer, and incorporation of readings about ethnography
research. I have studied how the nine members in my division communicate with
each other about work issues. The theme that has arisen most dramatically is the
lack of efficiency and ability to concisely explain projects to one another. The
major focus of this ethnography—based on members’ concerns during the first
interviews—centers on weekly meetings held by the division; two other types of
division meetings are included for comparison and contrast. Initial findings show
that the weekly division meetings do provide a good opportunity for members to
share their project information, but the structure of the meetings as they currently
operate lacks the positive structure needed to enhance productivity.

ANN—EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW YOUR BOSS WILL TEACH YOU
This ethnography outlines the learning processes relative to writing as intertwined
with learning processes relative to business success in a small metropolitan pub-
lic relations firm. The ethnographer, also a subject of this study, examines a va-
riety of writing samples and the manner in which lessons are presented as osten-
sibly limited to writing style. In addition to determining some of the acculturation
purposes behind the lessons, the ethnographer attempts to address the spirit in
which the lessons are received. Through both conversation with the authors and
interpretation of the written lessons, conclusions are drawn as to the success or
failure of the specific instructions and instructor.

ANNE—PREP SCHOOL BOYS WRITE: CULTURE IN CONTEXT
As one of only a handful of women on the campus of the Wilson School for Boys,
a prep school serving Washington’s elite, I used my student-teaching experience
as subject for my ethnography. In particular, I focused on the kinds of writing
and teaching practices for boys in Form III (ninth grade). Their regular teacher,
Mr. Peters, was also a coach in several sports and drew upon his contact with the
boys in this other venue to prompt their engagement in English through such
classroom techniques as “paragraph wars,” in which boys competed for the best
paragraphs. My attempt to introduce journal writing was unsuccessful, which
224   APPENDIX D

within the context of this larger ethnographic study I attribute to three factors:
the journals seemed less “masculine” than the argumentative thesis writing of most
other assignments; when the time necessary to complete them was weighed against
the time necessary for school tasks deemed more central, the latter took priority;
my status as student teacher, compounded by my gender in this all-male environ-
ment, did not lend weight to these journals. Treating the journals as both stu-
dent assignment and data for my own writing enabled me to assess this “failure”
with greater perspective.

BERNIE—TRIAL ATTORNEY WRITERS: ALL FACTS, NO FICTION
The researcher, an editor at an attorney’s association engaged in lobbying Con-
gress, studied the formats for reports written for four of the association’s jour-
nals. These reports regularly followed the same recipes, with individual writers’
slants on the issues made clear at times through selected quotes from interviewees.
In addition, manuscripts prepared by trial attorneys regularly displayed a step-
by-step, linear arguing process (just as these attorneys in interviews described a
step-by-step composing process), whereas manuscripts submitted by transactional
lawyers (engaged in contract and corporate law) showed evidence of more lat-
eral thinking.

BRANDEN—DISCURSIVE ELITISM IN A GOVERNMENT TRAVEL AGENCY
As a participant observer in a government travel agency striving to become an
influential voice both domestically and abroad in the tourism industry, I studied
two documents—a booklet and a weekly report—as well as the writing of them
to understand their significance in this local culture. My analysis draws heavily
on organizational psychology, as a result of both Edgar Schein’s readings for the
class and the degree to which Schein’s thought had influenced my principle in-
formant, Diane, third in command in policy at the agency. In particular, organi-
zational maneuvers among high-level players are interpreted in light of the past,
present, and future orientations of the organization. The booklet I studied, now
a year old, stood emblematic of past orientations of the agency for many, against
which to measure subtly their differences. The weekly report to the secretary of
commerce had a futurist orientation, elaborated by Diane but which incidentally
allowed certain players to hold other members to projected roles in the organi-
zation, all the while elaborating their own.

BRENDA—THE MANUSCRIPT REVIEW PROCESS AT SCHOOL LEADER MAGAZINE:
AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF POST-IT NOTES
This ethnography examines the manuscript review process of a bimonthly maga-
zine published by a national, nonprofit association of school principals. The first
section of the paper describes the unusual review process—which involves three
editors and which takes place entirely on three-inch-square yellow Post-it notes—
and gives the reader background information on the association, the magazine,
the editors themselves, and the workplace setting. Later sections explore the con-
tent and scope of the reviews, workplace undercurrents present in the notes, and
the gaps the Post-its fill in the absence of staff meetings, professional feedback,
and other forms of communication. The paper also addresses the criteria editors
use to rate manuscripts, and whether or not these criteria are sufficiently com-
municated to prospective authors. The ethnography ends with several recommen-
dations for improvement based on the findings of the study.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   225

CAROLYN—THE LAST TO KNOW: A TECHNICAL WRITER’S ETHNOGRAPHY
OF A SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

This ethnography focuses on the flow of information on a large software devel-
opment project at a technology consulting firm. I took notes during staff meet-
ings and conducted in-depth interviews with members of the three subcultures
working on the project—the Testing, Development, and Documentation and Train-
ing teams—and examined numerous artifacts from each group. I demonstrate how
these subcultures discover and disseminate information about the software among
themselves and with others on the project. I uncover gaps in this communication
and demonstrate that members of the Documentation and Training teams are
excluded from the information sharing process and are the last to learn about
important developments and updates. As a technical writer on the project, I be-
came strongly positioned as a member of the subculture most affected by this
ineffective communication. This study raises questions about why the gaps in
information sharing occur, how they affect employees’ morale and work, and what
action could be taken to open the channels of communication.

CASS—MANAGING INFORMATION, MANAGING PROJECTS, MANAGING AFFECT

This ethnographic study focuses on the management style of a supervisor for an
information management office in a small government agency. It outlines his
career, describes his management style, and uses interviews with colleagues to
examine how he motivates and finesses both his employees and those outside of
his office using various tools and techniques (both verbal and written) to man-
age projects. By examining this facet of the workplace culture, the author attempts
to correlate well-known and respected management styles with this man’s appar-
ently successful style. In particular, his humorous demonizing of bureaucratic
processes via comments and drawings with his staff creates a “we’re all in this
together” aura that masks subtle manipulations.

CHALLIE—ELECTRONIC MAIL COMMUNICATIONS AS TRAITS OF A
CORPORATE CULTURE
This two-month-long study of electronic mail in an association workplace began
because the researcher (myself), a new employee and a Macintosh user, had lim-
ited access to e-mail. A survey was developed and given to approximately one-
third of the staff; recipients proportionately reflected the hierarchical divisions
on staff. In addition to the surveys, the author saved the 253 e-mail messages she
received over the two-month period. Because survey results showed dramatic
differences in private message use among departments, the author focused on all-
staff messages: ones sent to everyone in the organization. Most of the all-staff
messages were general internal information that was not urgent. The next most
frequent category was externally related FYI. Further analysis discusses the types
of messages sent by each staff level. Series of messages on the same topic—called
“strings” in this paper but commonly known as “threads”—were also studied.
Analysis of the message threads and usage patterns led the author to recommend
changes in the work processes at the study site, such as increasing the number of
incoming fax machines, making a much-referenced paper listing of addresses an
electronic copy only, and updating software training procedures.

CHET—JUST DO IT . . . NOW! AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF A SMALL PUBLISHER
This ethnography is the study of the writing culture at Quill, Inc., a small-staffed
226   APPENDIX D

publications house in Tysons Corner, Virginia. I began this study with the intent
of determining how a writing and editing staff of five persons could successfully
produce a relatively large amount of material under strict deadlines. Because this
is also an autoethnography, I wanted to confine my observations and findings to
precise and accurate work habits and behavior, independent of personal knowl-
edge about this particular process. What I discovered almost immediately after
beginning to record field notes, was that that approach would not be practical
or constructive. My findings show responsive attitudes, teamwork, and talent to
be the cogs of Quill’s production machine under deadlines, the factor that most
prompts good, clear editing and writing. The culture is as unique as the person-
alities of its inhabitants; Quill’s functional writing process is dependent on five
individuals performing as a collective whole.

CORINNE—A MOUNT VERNON ETHNOGRAPHY
The Programs Department of Mount Vernon is responsible for all public percep-
tion of Mount Vernon. My ethnography focused on how their writing reflects
that mission, and how the “presence” of George Washington influences the work
that they produce, notably in its various reflections of civility. The lack of cohe-
siveness as a department, which I observed while working as an outside contrac-
tor, could be attributed to the individual nature of members’ approach to projects.
My ethnography makes some observations and suggestions to improve the pro-
cess, specifically the creation of a production/publication department with a for-
malized procedure for approving, supervising, reviewing, and editing projects.

DAISY—BEHIND THE BYLINES: LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE JOURNALISTS
AT A SMALL WEEKLY NEWSPAPER

This study, conducted over an eleven-week period, describes the newsroom work
environment and the journalists employed at a small, twice-weekly newspaper.
There are eight primary informants in different writing and supervisory positions
at the paper. The journalists provide their thoughts and opinions on writing prefer-
ences and styles, give advice to prospective journalists, explain their training to enter
the profession, discuss future aspirations, and describe what it takes to be suc-
cessful as a print reporter. The experiences of these reporters are also compared
to those of the author, who was a journalist for several years, and to those of other
professionals. It is hoped that this study can serve as a teaching tool for journal-
ism instructors at the secondary and postsecondary level. For journalism students,
it can serve as an in-depth guide to some of the realities of newspaper journalism.

DIANE—STRATEGIC PLANNING AND THE PUBLICATION PROCESS:
ATTEMPTING TO DISCURSIVELY ORDER A DISHEVELED CULTURE
“NCHE,” a medium-sized higher education association, located in the same
building as more than twenty other higher education associations, has been in-
volved in intense strategic planning during the last year. The focus of this plan-
ning has been not only to reorganize the publication strategy and procedures of
the association’s national office, but to develop a strategic plan to serve as a di-
rection for the association as it approaches its centennial. This study focuses on
the plan’s impact on the staff, management, and association as a whole, with
particular attention paid to the plan’s effect on the publication process and how
the writing and editing of the association is being “directed” by the document.
However, instead of providing order to the association, especially an ordered
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     227

connection between the association’s management and its employees, the plan-
ning has instead emphasized the great schism between the management and the
staff. By focusing on the impact of the plan, including the perceptions and per-
spectives of those affected, this study provides a glimpse of a culture comprised
of discontented staff with an extremely high turnover rate and a management team
unaware of the downwardly spiraling morale, trying to provide order and focus
in a top-down, discursive strategic plan.

ELAINE—AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF A HISTORY WRITING COMPANY

In this ethnography, I examine the development of a fifteen-minute film (entitled
“How the World Knows the Sterling Company”), produced by the History Place,
a company that writes corporate histories. The video recounts the one-hundred-
year history of advertising of a paper company. As I studied the culture and the
writing of this workplace, I interviewed the writers and the chief executive of-
ficer, and I read the corporate history on which the script is based. The final script
(and film) is vastly different from the first draft—it differs in length and tone and
has gone from an academic study to a light-hearted advertising piece. In this paper
I describe the history of this video, and report on the changes in the company
which came about as a result of the controversies surrounding the script.

ELLA—DISSATISFIED LEGAL PROFESSIONALS: IS IT A LACK OF
SUBSTANTIVE WRITING ASSIGNMENTS?
This is an honest portrayal of law firm life. This ethnography found that the
majority of writing conducted within this litigation group of a large Washing-
ton, D.C., law firm is nonlegal. The group acts as national coordinating counsel
for a large chemical company’s asbestos premises litigation and works together
with a team from the client company’s legal department. This pairing offers a study
in the aspects of client-attorney relationships when the client is an unwilling team
member. The ethnography concludes that little substantive writing combined with
poor client relations cause a growing number of legal professionals to become
dissatisfied with their chosen careers.

EMMA—LIFE AMONG THE LITTLE PEOPLE: AN ELEMENTARY ETHNOGRAPHY
I studied the correspondence and writing practices of the faculty and staff of an
area elementary school. The staff consists of 58 staff members including the prin-
cipal, 3 secretaries, 12 resource and specialist teachers, 22 classroom teachers,
and various other support staff. Through analysis of notes, memoranda, news-
letters, and rhetorical notes on students’ work, I observed how teachers’ jobs and
time constraints affected the kinds of writing they produced. I discovered that
shorter, off-the-cuff forms of writing were prevalent in an environment where free
time is scarce. The study suggests that the forms of writing, like the place from
which they originate, are primarily educational in nature. Both handwritten and
computer-generated forms of writing were analyzed for the ways in which they
seemed to establish (or reduce) distance between writers and readers.

GARY—SNAPSHOT OF AN INTERNET BUSINESS: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
This ethnography describes the local culture of an Internet-based job recruitment
company and how the department in charge of one of the company’s products, a
site on the World Wide Web, approaches writing. The ethnography describes the
228   APPENDIX D

physical environment, the products and services the company provides, the people
that I worked with, the actual work that I did at the company, and the writing
process involved with that work. While I make no broad conclusions about writing
in an Internet-based business, some of the more unusual aspects of the industry
are described. Issues of authorship, audience, and nontraditional writers are all
subjects of observation, particularly as rhetorical decisions are made in this fast-
paced authoring environment. These concerns may become more prevalent in
workplace writing in the future as this industry grows.

GEORGE—FOR SOMEONE ELSE’S SIGNATURE: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
OF WRITING IN A MILITARY ORGANIZATION
This study examines the processes, products, and effects of writing, specifically
ghostwriting, in the culture of one military headquarters organization. Ghostwrit-
ing, or writing for someone else’s signature, is inherent in military cultures be-
cause of their authoritarian, hierarchical structures: Only those with proper au-
thority may sign official documents although the signers often do not write the
documents. Conducted using standard ethnographic techniques, the study illus-
trates how such research methodologies offer a structured framework for study-
ing the writing done within a culture. The use of ethnographic techniques requires
“triangulating” findings to draw conclusions that are substantiated by balanced
data. Data collection methods used in the study include personal interviews,
questionnaires, document analysis, and read-aloud protocols (to test ghostwrit-
ers’ intents and readers’ interpretations.) The study explores readers’ responses
to the texts to assess the effectiveness of the ghostwriting process in helping the
members of the organization meet their goals. The readers’ responses also pro-
vide an assessment of the efficiency of the organization’s ghostwriting processes—
from writing, revision, and signing to reading. Recommendations are provided
on how this military organization’s management might (1) help writers and revi-
sors improve their writing processes to make reading more efficient (and the
ghostwriting process as a whole more effective), (2) help revisors and signers
improve the document review process to cut out wasted time, effort, and psycho-
logical pain, and (3) institute a new regime for signing that would allow author-
ity to be shared more widely throughout the hierarchy.

GINGER—ETHNOGRAPHY OF STANLEY TROUT
This ethnography focuses on what role humor plays in the workplace, specifi-
cally in a law firm. The study of humor reflects back on that of the legal discourse
in which the participant works and what it means for the employees who work
there. There are many different ways of relating to impersonalizing legal discourse
and humor is demonstrated to be one effective method. Different kinds of hu-
mor within the workplace are studied and demonstrated. It is also discussed how
humor is used as a tool within legal discourse and for whom it actually works,
the employee or the employer. Humor is studied as a much larger element within
the workplace than would be thought at first glance.

GLORIA—DISTRIBUTING THE NATION’S “CHAMPAGNE”: REFERENCE
CORRESPONDENCE IN THE NEWSPAPER AND CURRENT PERIODICAL
READING ROOM AS A REFLECTION OF LIBRARY MISSION AND CULTURE
This study investigates letter correspondence provided by reference staff in a read-
ing room of the Library of Congress, the Newspaper and Current Periodical
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    229

Reading Room of the Serial and Government Publications Division. The tangible
and intangible nature of correspondence is explored as a representation of the
reference culture in the Library of Congress. Within this division, reference corres-
pondence serves multiple purposes: as a representation of the library to the pub-
lic, an educational tool for librarians, and as evidence of reference philosophy
and practice. The implied authors of letters written in response to requests for
research thus take on significance as singular representations of the library, even
though frequently these letters are composed by several different researchers over
the course of correspondence.

GRACE—EVOLUTION OF A FLAGSHIP PUBLICATION IN A PROFESSIONAL
MEMBER SOCIETY: ORIGINS AND EXPLORATION
The researcher occupied the position of manuscript coordinator at the American
Society for the Mapping Sciences, whose members come from government, in-
dustry, and the academy. Submissions for publication thus come from three very
diverse sectors, and the manuscript coordinator was often confused by reviews
that seemed to lack standard policies and guidelines, particularly concerning the
academics. As part of her study of this local culture, she interviewed editors and
directors of publications and engaged in participant-observation at the society’s
annual convention. She also conducted archival research on the history of the
society and the evolution of its flagship publication, the Journal of Mapping Sci-
ences. She discovered submission and review practices that had evolved as the
field evolved and as the relationships among the three principal constituencies
evolved—the government and industrial sector having shaped the field initially
and the academic sector having enjoyed a more recent rise to prominence. The
recent reviews of manuscripts that requested resubmission after revision (rather
than flat rejection) came to make sense as a part of a knowledge-production pro-
cess vital to academic writing.

GWEN—DOCUMENTATION IN THE WORKPLACE: HOW INTRIGUE
CAN BECOME A PART OF DAILY LIFE

This study was conducted in the schizophrenia research branch of a federally
funded psychiatric research hospital. The original goal of this study was to ob-
serve the conflict caused by impending personnel layoffs and their impact on office
personnel as well as on office dynamics. It was found that, either as part of their
daily routine or in response to the impending layoffs, four out of the five office
members (including the author) keep some form of documentation on either their
own actions or the actions of others for personal protection or career advance-
ment. All of this documentation is largely being conducted without the knowl-
edge of the other office staff. This hidden subculture was found to affect inter-
personal relationships, office dynamics, and career advancement. Documentation
was only one aspect of this subculture which, due to its concealed nature, is called
“intrigue” throughout the paper. The reasons for documentation are discussed,
and suggestions are offered for resolving some of the conflict and disparity be-
tween documenters.

HART—SEEKING THE FUTURE, RESPECTING THE PAST:
COMMUNICATIONS AT MIDATLANTIC UNIVERSITY
The researcher conducted on-site observations and interviews with members of
the communications office at Midatlantic University, with a focus on some of the
230   APPENDIX D

publications produced by the office: the alumni magazine, special reports, and
recruiting publications. Writers in the department cover regular “beats,” which
supply material for regularly issued press releases. The most challenging aspect
of these assignments and those that contribute to the publications cited include
articulating simultaneously a support of time-honored traditions on this sleepy
southern campus as well as a forward-looking spirit that will attract students.
Document analysis reveals recurrent tropes such as “aspiration” that reflect this
dual appeal and frequent interplays between photos of campus red-brick colo-
nial architecture and text that projects the environment represented by this pe-
riod architecture into the future.

HEATHER—THE ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION: AN ETHNOGRAPHY

After moving its entire office from New York to Reston, Virginia, the Engineer-
ing Association had to hire a completely new staff. Problems existed in transi-
tion planning and a new staff was thrust into a foreign environment with little to
no leadership. Instead of being inducted into an existing culture, the new employ-
ees were left to establish a culture on their own while learning a new job. This
lack of existing culture created a disjointed staff where employees acted as indi-
viduals rather than as a cohesive team. A lack of social interaction pervaded the
professional atmosphere as well, and editors rarely consulted with each other for
opinions and suggestions. The result of this lack of interaction is an inefficient
production cycle that fosters misunderstandings and resentment.

HELEN—EDITING: CHANGING TEXTS AND IMPLIED AUTHORS
I examined the types of interventions made by editors of a professional govern-
ment magazine and how those interventions altered the implied authorship of the
texts edited. I explored four types of interventions: factual text additions, cre-
ative text additions, rewriting, and text deletion. I found that the changes made
enhanced the image of the implied author by adding the editors’ expertise in
written communication to the authors’ expertise in the subject matter, thus cre-
ating an implied author who possessed both. Representing the authors in this way
benefits the readers, the authors, the magazine, the magazine’s sponsoring agency,
and others.

HOLLY—THE WORKPLACE: FINDING YOURSELF IN THE PROCESS
As an MA student in English and a professional editor for three years, I took a
personal perspective with this ethnography. In the course of the study, I lost the
position which was my site and got a new job. I began to see this project as an
opportunity to reflect on my experiences and education before moving forward;
my undergraduate alma mater’s alumnae magazine therefore fits as my publish-
ing site. My study is an examination of how people fit into an editorial process.
In particular, I focus on professional identity in authoring procedures marked by
high turnover in personnel and gross discrepancies between work performed and
wages garnered.

ITSY—ARC: AN ETHNOGRAPHY ON SMALL BUSINESS

The researcher studied ARC, Inc., a small business that manages two associations
serving communicators and librarians. Parallels were drawn between the physi-
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   231

cal setting (a restored townhouse in Alexandria, Virginia) and the staff dynamics
in this family-sized business consisting of a director, two staff members/writers,
and the graphics specialist (whose office was located in the basement). Based on
interviews and observations, the researcher concluded that a sense of family drove
a commitment to excellent performance in addition to professional commitments.

JACKIE—REMEMBER THE MEMBER: STAFF-VOLUNTEER
COLLABORATION IN WRITING FOR AN ASSOCIATION

This autoethnography centers on my work as an editor at a large trade organiza-
tion, where I work with other staff writers/editors and association members who
volunteer their time to produce periodicals and other publications. The Associa-
tion for Engineering, where I have worked for one and a half years, emphasizes
the importance of staff-volunteer relations. This theme—prevalent among all
aspects of the association’s projects, not just communications—poses unique ques-
tions about the management of corporate writing. With my background and
experience in journalism and public relations, I find my current role unique in
that it is often a reporter’s job in an in-house and external public relations set-
ting. The sometimes complementary and sometimes clashing interests between
the reporting/PR aspects create unique management and member relations issues
in terms of planning, job responsibility and accountability, delegation of duties,
and editorial review. This work should be of interest and use to anyone interested
in the writing process in a workplace setting, including organizational psycholo-
gists, professional writers and editors, educators, association managers, and others
who follow communications trends. On a more pragmatic note, this paper could
especially benefit people who work (or want to work) in corporate communica-
tions, particularly for an association.

JAN—NEW ISSUE MANAGEMENT AT UMP: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
As a part-time consultant to the insurance association where I had worked full-
time for the past six years before being laid off recently, I conducted ethnographic
inquiry into a new topic driving reorganization in the local culture: issue man-
agement. The association had just changed issue management practices from
“functional” to “issue specific,” and I used field notes and interviews, along with
text analysis of memos on certain issues, to ascertain differences in organizational
treatment of these issues. What this research revealed is that the personalities and
dynamics among them were so entrenched in this culture that new structures sug-
gested for issues management fell by the wayside; in the end, dominion established
and maintained by particular players as part of their political maneuvering still
drove issues management.

JANE—SELECTIVELY HONORING DEADLINES

Meeting deadlines can be detrimental to the success of documentation. In one
government office, the ability or inability to meet deadlines seemed to correlate
with the document’s general significance, the authority of its intended reader, and
the professional condition and attitude of its author. Although all documenta-
tion had to pass through a complex review process, items with a high-authority
audience traveled through this process more rapidly. The perceived value of a
document was also determined by the authority of the individual or department
who initiated work on the assignment. If the production of a document were
232   APPENDIX D

peripheral to an employee’s main function, he or she might allow the project to
languish and, eventually, perish. Deadlines also were missed as a result of indi-
vidual tendencies to flout the review process. In such cases, the intent may have
been to meet deadlines by forgoing lengthy review systems, but such oversight
did not go unnoticed and, in the end, only exacerbated delays. In some cases of
missed deadlines, no time frames had ever been clearly laid out for document pro-
duction. The provision of specific deadlines to writers, reviewers, and editors could
alleviate some issues of tardiness.

JANICE—FAMILY BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS:
THE DYING ART OF THE BUSINESS LETTER

I studied professional writing in a Washington, D.C., area family-owned and
-operated turnkey fulfillment business that is about to pass to second generation
control. Using recorded observations and interviews and writing samples includ-
ing both the CEO’s client correspondence and the second generation partners’
form letter drafts, I recorded this business’s dilemma as the CEO nears the last
stages of terminal cancer. Of particular note in this study is the fact that none of
the young partners have ever written any business letters geared toward client
acquisition, and, to date, they only communicate with existing clients via e-mail
and telephone. As a result, one added feature of this ethnography is my position
as observer/activist, a nontraditional ethnographic role. In this capacity I proposed
collaborative writing to the partners as one option to explore for the future.

JEFF—TECHNICAL EDITING: ADVENTURES IN CULTURE CLASH
People with technical and scientific backgrounds—civil engineers, for example—
tend to exhibit a distinctive workplace writing style. They are fond of passive voice
and agentless sentences (“The landfill liner was examined”). They nominalize,
or “smother,” their verbs (“an evaluation was performed”). They create long
strings of modifiers (“the raw influent soluble phosphorus concentration”). Use
of such constructions often makes meanings unclear, but it also serves to identify
the author as a member of a professional culture and as a technical expert. The
editor’s attempt to assert his own expert status by decoding dense text and break-
ing up long modifier strings often is seen as an assault on the engineer’s identity
as a technical expert.

JEN—OFFICE STYLE AND WRITING STYLE IN A
BIWEEKLY SUBSCRIPTION NEWSLETTER
This ethnography traces the history of JS, a biweekly subscription newsletter
serving government employees and those seeking employment with the govern-
ment. The study traces the history of this privately owned, twenty-two-person
organization within an organizational psychology framework, in particular as
“myths and legends” prevail, much of them related to the company founder and
current president. Against this background, the study focuses on the selection and
management of office decor as it becomes more regulated and controlled as one
descends the organizational hierarchy. Parallels are drawn with latitude in prose
style—as it is extended to those on the upper organization and withheld from those
at lower editorial levels. The style of the editorial pages in this job announcement
bulletin reflects this latitude and is analyzed here as “solicitous,” appealing in
particular to higher-end readers following trends in employment and thus occu-
pying a similar professional class with that of company directors.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   233

JIHAD—WRITE AN ESSAY, SELL FRIED CHICKEN

Ethnographic research on workplace writing explores new venues for writing
instruction. My ethnographic study of writing in a fast food franchise entails the
analysis of writing as it relates to the theory and practice of management and com-
munication in this culture. Furthermore, I narratologically analyze the writing of
certain individuals to shed some light on the formation of rhetorical positions and
voices in this workplace. The study reveals that rhetorical discourse is contained
within social and situational positions in the workplace. Moreover, the study
results offer new insights to the teaching of writing in the classroom, particularly
as writers’ available positions are configured within genres such as the memo.

JILLIAN—FRAMING REALITY: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
OF AN ELECTRONIC COMMUNITY
This ethnography draws on Erving Goffman’s frame analysis and posits that elec-
tronic communities constitute one of the “multiple realities” described in his book.
These communities should therefore be viewed “nonjudgementally” by the eth-
nographer, who should, as David Fetterman says, “suspend disbelief.” The pa-
per then goes on to describe Megabyte University, a list devoted computers and
writing, of which the researcher is a member. Self-representations of members who
post comments are discussed, using the qualified signatures of these members.
The shift in membership over the years is discussed as a reflection of evolving
approaches to list membership taken by people interested in composition and
writing and active nationally in real and virtual discussions of scholarly life.

JOANNE—ETHNOGRAPHY OF A DOCUMENT
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: A PROCESS OF CHANGE

A student ethnographer examines a documentation development project at a
government contractor site, including the extensive changes in the project and
the technology that had an impact on it. The original project had tightly defined
requirements. After a year, the document standards, schedule, and delivery pro-
cedure had changed. The company involved, the student’s employer, was a small
disadvantaged business headquartered in a suburb of Washington, D.C. The doc-
umentation project required hiring new staff. The documentation team was then
organized into a highly hierarchical organization. Persons at different levels of
the hierarchy saw different factors as significant in the project. Communication
among the various groups involved in the project required use of the Internet, e-
mail, and local area network capabilities in addition to meetings and individual
discussions, and was a key factor in developing the documentation. Preparation
of the documentation schedule illustrates the planning, production, configura-
tion management, and quality assurance involved in the project. The results of
the study indicate that major technology innovations, new coding procedures, and
the federal government’s emphasis on providing useful products and services were
instrumental in causing changes to the original plans.

JOE—THE CASE OF THE MISGUIDED STYLE MANUAL:
A STUDY OF CORPORATE WRITING AND REPRESENTATION
This study explores the corporate writing culture at Acme, Inc., a software de-
velopment firm. To better update an old corporate style manual, an ethnographic
study of the writers and writing styles at Acme was started to learn what types of
234   APPENDIX D

written materials employees produced and where they felt they needed help with
their writing. During the study, however, the author noticed a lopsided (mis)rep-
resentation of the views of management versus the views of nonmanagement
employees. In an effort to find out why a group of employees was misrepresented,
this study-turned-mystery looks at the differences of the responses to surveys and
questions answered by the two groups.
JULIE—THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LOCAL CULTURES
AND THE TEMPERAMENT OF STUDENT WRITING

This study explored the nature of the relationship that exists between various local
cultures and student writing and found that a symbiotic relationship, as varied
as the students and their cultures, exists between the two. The study focused on
a second semester freshman composition class at a local community college. Data
were also collected from various other student sources including a local business-
man who is a part-time student and an art student attending an art and design
school. Specifically, the study found that students do not carve their lives into
separate spheres. There is overlapping between the various domains of students’
lives in the following ways: students tend to transfer knowledge and skills from
their work to their classroom writing, and their way of seeing and thinking about
writing is heavily influenced by the disciplines they are studying. Several sugges-
tions for ways to apply the research findings to teaching are included. These are
a brief sketch of a plan to combine volunteerism and college writing, a suggestion
that team teaching of block courses be encouraged, and a recommendation that
schools need to offer more computer-based writing classes.
KALI—SINK OR SWIM: HOW EMPLOYEES STAY
AFLOAT IN A NAVY CONTRACTING COMPANY
The Navy contracting industry is volatile, unpredictable, and offers little job se-
curity or recognition to its employees, which could affect the quality of their
writing. None of the participants in this study agreed absolutely on the exact
correlation between lack of job security and quality of writing, but all of the
employees had an internal work ethic that stimulated them to work hard for
personal satisfaction. This study gives a brief explanation of the ever shifting Navy
contracting business, gives short biographies of the participants, and then dis-
cusses how the individuals perceive the effects of minimal job security on the
quality of their writing.
KARLA—WRITING UP THE CORPORATE LADDER: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC
EXAMINATION OF COMMUNICATIONS AT THE COSMETIC
MANUFACTURERS AND RETAILERS ASSOCIATION
The purpose of this ethnography is to examine the impact of association infra-
structure on internal communications between staff members and its effect on
the association’s external publications. The subject of study is the Cosmetic Man-
ufacturers and Retailers Association’s newsletter, Snapshots, and the activities of
its editorial board. Class structure is a very important aspect of the culture of the
association. The members of the editorial board subscribe to the tenet that infor-
mation flows through CMRA from the top down. The members of the editorial
board belong to a high-ranking level of staff within the association. It is at the
top that the messages of the association are developed. The writers and editors
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     235

are merely the conduits for moving the information out from CMRA to the mem-
bers of the association, Congress, and the media. This ethnography considers how
this phenomenon of circumventing creativity and voice affects the process of writ-
ing and editing in the association. All names (including the name of the associa-
tion and any mention of its members) have been changed.

KATE—STRANGER IN A FAMILIAR LAND: A WRITING TEACHER’S
ETHNOGRAPHY OF A UNIVERSITY WRITING CENTER
I observed tutoring sessions, workshops, staff meetings, and e-mail interchanges
of the writing center of a local state university. The staff includes a full-time di-
rector, two full-time assistants (graduate students), a full-time instructor, and six
part-time tutors (graduate students). The majority of tutorials are with under-
graduate ESL students. Observations of tutorials revealed an array of interesting
approaches for discussing writing with students, yet little expertise in actually
teaching ESL students to become better writers. Nearly all of the tutors were
graduate students in the MFA track, supported through this work-study arrange-
ment; many of them were surprised to learn that the MA track in the teaching of
writing and literature, in which I was completing my degree, existed. The study
raises questions about staffing positions in the center, in light of expertise, career
aims of graduate students, and needs of the writing center’s clientele.

KELLY—REVISING A PUBLICATION’S PRODUCTION PROCESS:
EXAMINING THE TEAM CONCEPT

This study narrates the roles and responsibilities of a creative team, including
writers, editors, graphic designers, and production/business managers, in produc-
ing informational and promotional material for a public university. Through a
description of the work site, a description of the typical process of producing these
documents from start to finish, interviews of participants, and an analysis of team
concepts in business and publications settings, this ethnography uncovers some
of the successes and difficulties of implementing Total Quality Management prin-
ciples in a small publications environment. It also offers the participants’ sugges-
tions for continuous process improvement.

KIRSTEN—A DAY IN THE LIFE OF ASSOCIATION MAGAZINE STAFF

The life of a writer isn’t necessarily a solitary process. Today writers work in en-
vironments which force them to interact, make choices, and face challenges—all
for the publication of a quality product. In this study, I have tried to capture a
“snapshot” of the typical work day of an association magazine staff in order to
identify the duties and choices which one would not immediately associate with
a writer. Included are observations on the use of e-mail to compose regular col-
umns, conveying publications processes to other departments in order to garner
information from them more effectively, scheduling feature stories well in advance,
and review of bluelines, and meeting agendas. This “Day in the Life” compila-
tion dovetails with findings on collaborative writing by researchers such as Janis
Forman, Lisa Ede and Andrea Lunsford, and Cynthia Selfe; it will educate stu-
dents who are considering a career as a writer. With a look at the typical day of
an association magazine writer, students will be in a better position to determine
if writing in an association is the career for them.
236   APPENDIX D

KOLAR—WRITING IN A U.S. SENATOR’S PRESS OFFICE

This ethnography follows several months in the career of a high-profile senator
as he seeks reelection, written from my perspective as an assistant to the assis-
tant deputy press secretary. It acknowledges the senator’s savvy at garnering re-
sources for and attention to his constituents, as well as findings by the Senate
Ethics Committee that he has “conducted the business of his office in an improper
and inappropriate manner.” This business takes place among the “Tribes on the
Hill” described by ethnographer Jack Weatherford, in which the new arrivals in
Washington are socialized into the machinations of national government politics.
As illustration of this socialization, this ethnography offers one writing practice
in the senator’s press office, regular fabrication of letters from constituents in
response to a political opponent’s faux pas, intended to bolster the senator’s
political position as a spokesperson for this constituency.

KYLE—PRODUCING COMMON GROUND MAGAZINE

This ethnography follows the production of the May/June issue of Common
Ground, a magazine published by a nonprofit association in Alexandria, Virginia,
and characterized by high turnover in staff. Historical background on the asso-
ciation is presented, including a shift in 1991 from a newsletter serving constitu-
ents to a full-blown magazine, along with the emergence in 1993 of the magazine’s
guiding philosophy of “service journalism.” The researcher, who is also editor
and sole full-time staffer of the magazine, retraces the scrambling to meet the
deadline, which included frequent faxes and voice mail messages to contributing
(unpaid) authors. He also enumerates his responsibilities, which include assign-
ing and editing feature articles and departments, coordinating staff proofread-
ing assignments, producing the annual editorial calendar, and working with the
art director to develop design and art ideas. His own writing processes for the
cover story are retraced, from the original idea (newspaper clips from Florida),
through meetings with the art director, through revising of headlines and layouts,
through drafts of the article evolving through plays on words, to the final issue.
The work culture is interpreted as one that the editor can use to stoke the cre-
ative process.

LARA—THE IMPACT OF WRITING A SCHOOL PLAN
I observed collaborative writing efforts and the process of writing a school plan
in an elementary school. Most of the staff are well established while the princi-
pal is fairly new to the school and to writing a school plan. (Plans are composed
anew every three years.) Tensions between teachers, differing philosophies among
the staff, and outside community influences impacted the writing of the school
plan. Observations revealed that the school plan, in theory, has an enormous effect
on the philosophy and direction of the school. However, in practice, at this par-
ticular culture, the school plan’s impact is minimal at best and negative at worst,
due to inadequate structuring of the collaborative writing sessions that resulted
in affective conflict rather than substantive debate.

LEATHE—THE CULTURE OF A GOVERNMENT CONTRACTOR
The business culture at a northern Virginia company is examined through the
announcement of a move, a description of the company’s current building and
offices, the dress code, employee access to the building and offices, and use of
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     237

the paging system. The company’s staff is described in terms of job titles, educa-
tion levels, and number of foreign-born. Company documents are cited to estab-
lish how the staff is organized in task teams. Some of the ways the business cul-
ture affects teamwork are examined through a brief study of a Web site task team.

LEE—TECHNOLOGY IN THE COLLEGE WRITING CENTER: FINDING THE BALANCE
The researcher studied the use of educational software and the teaching of word
processing as they enhanced students’ writing skills in the writing center at
Pleasantview Community College. This study was situated in an institutional con-
text that had witnessed a recent relocation of the writing center from the English
Department to the Campus Learning Resource Center and a decline in one-to-
one conferences as computer-aided individualized instruction rose. Using partici-
pant observation (the researcher was the writing center director) and student
surveys, it was found that students valued the computer work yet regretted the
inavailability of one-to-one conference tutors for their drafts. (Tutors were vol-
unteers, since the writing center budget made no provision for them.) The study
concludes with a hope that the college will recognize the need for increased com-
puter-supported instruction and one-on-one conferencing and budget accordingly.

LEIGH—SPEECH WRITING AT AGRA: WRITING IN THE TRENCHES
Drawing upon on-site observations, numerous interviews with writers, and analy-
sis of speeches they have produced, this ethnography describes speech writing by
four civil servants for the director of a high-profile government organization. These
writers develop speeches that the director will present based primarily on three
factors: the director’s history and favorite dictums, popular metaphors of the time,
and the administration’s official position on topics addressed in each speech. Six
people appear on the clearance sheet for each speech, to monitor an average of
sixteen speeches per month. The writers’ work is self-described as in the “trenches,”
since they write individually yet as a team, supporting one another regularly
through reviews and edits, and particularly when any member is “crashing” on
a speech. Part of their work entails listening to the director as he delivers speeches
and taking notes on falters and strong moments. The personality of the speaker
is the driving force behind work in this idea factory, which relies heavily on recy-
cling ideas that have worked well in previous speeches.

LENA—PRODUCING A JOURNAL FOR SCIENCE EDUCATORS: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
This study provides some insight into the culture of a small staff who have the
responsibility of producing one of the several magazines of a national associa-
tion on science education. The study describes both the national association as
well as the slick, four-color magazine the staff produces. Primarily through de-
tailed description of each staff member and the role he or she plays in producing
the publication, the author discusses the management philosophy of the manag-
ing editor, the harmonious interaction of the staff members, the challenge of editing
articles by novice writers, the practice of hiring freelance graphic artists, and the
association’s concern about safety issues. Based on some of the comments made
by the staff members, the document also contains a discussion of career advance-
ment issues for those in writing, editing, and graphic design; for publications
professionals, the author indicates that an employee’s earning power may never
increase dramatically unless the employee enters management and leaves writ-
ing, editing, and designing to the more poorly paid. The document concludes with
238   APPENDIX D

a discussion of the application of the word “ethnography” to studies about
nonethnic groups. The conclusion also contains a few comments about ways to
obtain better, more complete, more interesting field data.

LISA—WRITING AT COMMUNITY NATIONAL BANK
To study writing at my place of work, a small year-old bank in northern Virginia
referred to here as Community National, I used document analysis, interviews,
and observations. Against a projected image of “family” (twelve eight-by-ten
portraits of each of Community’s employees hang on the wall of the “family room”
where customers wait until bank representatives greet them), I analyzed a schism
in management and writing styles between the bank’s two principal divisions:
Operations and Commercial Loans. Staffing of each division follows gender lines,
Operations consisting of ten females and Commercial Loans of two males. Writ-
ing style in each division is markedly different, with Operations writing charac-
terized by brevity, direct phrasing, and occasional colloquialisms and Loan writ-
ing characterized by wordiness, legal terminology, and formality. Analysis showed
that these written styles, adopted from general styles within the industry, in this
setting also melded with oral interactions among genders, in particular as males
associated the discursive style of loans with banking tradition, to which women
were perceived as newcomers.

LIZ—WRITING STYLE AT THE WORLD BANK: AN ETHNOGRAPHY
With approximately 9,500 staff occupying some 19 buildings in downtown
Washington, D.C., the World Bank is the largest development bank lending to
developing countries in the world. Staff at the bank fall into two categories, pro-
fessional and support, separated by a glass ceiling and reflected in the title of an
anonymously authored text, “How to Write Like the Rest of Us,” in which the
style of bank reports is parodied through wordiness, repeated nominalizations,
and local jargon. This ethnography supplements this internal view with the opin-
ions gained through interviews with report writing instructors in the training
division, editors, and report authors. Based on these opinions and other materi-
als gained as a participant-observer, the author concludes that the competitive,
status-conscious environment seems to promote a ponderous, academic writing
style in which staff display their knowledge by overwriting and, ironically, at the
same time display their deficient mastery of the English language.

LOIS—WRITING CORPORATE CULTURE: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF
CORPORATE CULTURES IN A VIRTUAL OFFICE ENVIRONMENT
The author, a graduate student of professional writing, performed an ethnographic
study of the development of corporate cultures and countercultures within her
employer’s sales department during a time of extensive reorganization and refor-
mulation of the corporate mission. These events occurred in a virtual (home-based)
workplace environment where written documents were the principal means of
communication within and between work groups. Her observations about the
existence of imposed and reactive cultural products within the organization de-
fines a gap where there is no intersection of the disparate corporate cultures. The
maintenance of this gap consumes a significant amount of energy in the company.
The author considers the impact of her position as a midcareer female manager
on her data collection and evaluation activities.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     239

MACK—PERZINE ETHNOGRAPHY

The personal magazine (Perzine) explosion has not gone unnoticed. From Time
to Seventeen to Playboy to the Chronicle of Higher Education the phenomenon
has been examined and commented upon. Much has been made of motivation:
What drives people to bare their souls in writing for the entertainment of com-
plete strangers? I’ve avoided entering a discussion on reasons and concentrated
more on ways. How do the writers write? How do they put their zines together?
How do they use language? How do they consider audience response? How do
they edit? This ethnography begins with a brief examination of the respondents
and their reading habits. Obvious connections exist that need more teasing apart.
Next comes a look at the editing process, followed by short sections on audience
response considerations, ’zine slang and conventions, production, and the ’zine
look. An annotated bibliography concludes the paper.

MAGGIE—THE BATTLE OF THE BOOK: ONE EDITOR’S STRUGGLE
This study of a midsize book publishing firm, by following the production of a
manuscript from idea to bound book, reveals a culture in which workers are
largely autodidactic. The narrator—also the researcher and associate editor at
the company operating from an office distant from the company’s main hub—
walks through the workplace experience, which include communicating with
authors and colleagues in another city via e-mail, telephone, fax, voice mail, and
overnight delivery service in order to bring a product to fruition. This piece of-
fers to the first-time professional insider tips on the steps of the trade, the subtle
nuances necessary to work with other employees, how to communicate with face-
less authors, how to transform countless e-mail messages into a bound book, and,
with a little luck and tenacity, how to do it right the first time.

MANDY—AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF WRITING
IN A CONSTRUCTION ASSOCIATION
While working as a secretary at Boston, a leading national trade association rep-
resenting 8,000 general contractor firms and some 24,500 industry associate
members in 102 chapters nationwide, I used participant-observation techniques
to study writing as it was part of this local culture. This culture is almost exclu-
sively white and male, reflected in a hierarchy that includes nonwhites only in
administrative positions and in the mail room. The culture also includes many
illicit maneuvers among certain middle managers as they attempt to finesse the
bureaucracy for personal gain. This study focused on document production as it
was affected by both the racism and sexism of the culture and by the finessing of
one middle manager. Since document production followed highly irregular, in-
terrupted, and unnecessarily reiterative paths, this study reveals a process ren-
dered extremely expensive through the withholding of knowledge among divi-
sions and ultimately wasteful of both human and material resources.

MARLA—COMMUNICATIONS WITHIN A HIGH SCHOOL: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
Through the use of recognized ethnographic techniques, I have launched a study
of how and what coworkers in a public high school communicate with each other.
By carefully researching my own workplace, a setting I know well, I have tried to
establish both insider and outsider views. Stemming from numerous interviews
with certified staff, teachers and administrators, a few key issues emerged. Among
240   APPENDIX D

the staff’s concerns are a feeling of being ill-informed, a sense of powerlessness,
and a desire to improve lines of communication throughout the ranks. Everyone
with whom I conferred expressed a sincere wish to communicate in an efficient,
effective manner. I believe that any flaws in the system are unintentional.

MARY—DEADLINES AND BYLINES: TIME AND COLLABORATIVE
WRITING IN THE CORPORATE ENVIRONMENT

This study describes the role of organizational structure and hierarchy in the
production of corporate documents. By examining a top management consulting
firm that predicts the decline of corporate hierarchy as we know it, this paper dis-
cusses how the firm’s unique nonhierarchical environment allows its employees
to efficiently produce collaboratively written documents.

MAY—HOW MANY HANDS ARE ON THIS? A LOOK AT THE INFLUENCES
ON THE PUBLIC RELATIONS WRITING AT CAPITOL HOSPITAL
This ethnography examines how the writing of the marketing and public relations
department at Capitol Hospital (a pseudonym) impacted various members of the
local work culture. I interviewed representatives from the hospital who were in-
volved in the writing process as editors, those who provided quotes and background
information or posed for photographs, and I share segments of these in-depth dis-
cussions in this study. Through my research an individualistic behavior is exem-
plified in the published hospital “beliefs” and mission statement produced by the
executives and board members, where improving oneself and helping those in one’s
immediate area are spoken of in high regard; however, concepts such as team-
work are not directly addressed. Thus the marketing and public relations depart-
ment’s call for departments, subsidiary offices, off-campus physicians, and board
members to band together to promote the hospital to the community and other
professional services through written communication pieces was received passively,
and in some cases, with a disgruntled attitude and even refusal. This ethnogra-
phy draws conclusions regarding the reasoning for the culture’s poor attitude for
the work of the public relations materials, with an emphasis on upper manage-
ment’s experience and regard for the marketing and public relations department.

MEG—PROVING WORTH AND MANAGING EXPECTATIONS:
THE CORPORATE MONTHLY REPORT
This study focuses on a global information corporation and its corporate depart-
ments’ use of a monthly report to manage expectations, promote individuals’
work, and reaffirm the worth of individuals and departments. The study also fo-
cuses on how in this corporate culture, effectively portraying work accomplished
equals, to some extent, success. While many lower-level workers view the reporting
mechanism as “jumping through hoops,” other senior-level employees view it as
a reflection on their management, hard work, and reason for existing within the
corporation. The department I studied does not bring in revenue, and so in this
case, the effective use of words equals dollar signs.

MEGAN—INTENTIONAL VAGUENESS IN DEVELOPMENT DISCOURSE

This ethnography is the continuation of an emerging discussion in academia re-
garding the purpose and necessity of vague language in particular situations. This
paper focuses on the reasons why fund raisers need to be intentionally vague in
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES     241

some written documents and publications. The reasons include the need for time-
less language to allow for the greatest degree of flexibility, broad language that
allows a scholarship or program to be inclusive of as many potential student
beneficiaries as possible, and personal letters that must be applied to a wide au-
dience. Implications are drawn for a greater awareness and acceptance of strate-
gic vagueness in academic, scientific, and professional writing.

NANCY AND ELLIE—HTO: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF WRITING
IN AN EDUCATIONAL FACILITY PLANNING COMPANY
This study uses two researchers, one from inside the company and one from out-
side, to gain definite emic and etic perspectives at the start of the research pro-
cess. They examined the writing of a small educational facility planning company
and the environment that allows the writing to occur. They discovered that a
family-type atmosphere had developed from the intense collaboration among the
employees who were constantly striving to complete a project for a client. The
limited number of employees causes the documents produced to be standardized
to save time, so authorship and creativity are often lost. The question of who is
an expert appeared repeatedly during the study. Each member of the company
realized the importance of her own roles and the need for collaboration to pro-
duce a document.

NIDEAN—ASCRIBING MEANING TO MUSCLES: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY OF
HOW A FITNESS FACILITY MANIPULATES WITH LANGUAGE
This study examines a fitness company owner’s meaning-making language tac-
tics, aimed strategically at ensnaring clients. It looks first at the way company
documents linguistically pull clients in through subtle choices in document de-
sign and wording. Then it examines how gym discourse works to keep them “in,”
primarily through attributing power to a trim and toned body and sloth to a soft
and weak one. Next, the study explores how fitness fanaticism has become a cul-
tural panacea for those with marginal senses of self-esteem and thus how this
company has made an easy entrance into this manipulation. Finally, it looks briefly
at the fitness “rules” the company generates to codify beliefs in writing and to
firm up client devotion.

NORMA—MEDICAL SHORTHAND
Writing in a doctor’s office is not only affected by customary practice, but by time
allocation. Medical shorthand, common in the medical field, is used by Dr. Dixon
and his staff to document patient information. This shorthand is of a consistent
style and finds its way into home and outside use. Moreover, the concise and to-
the-point writing style that shorthand demands is also seen in letters, manuals,
and reports written by staff. Time to write is the greatest challenge the office faces
on a daily basis. Constant use of medical shorthand makes that time.

NYCK—WRITING A COMPANY’S IMAGE AND WORKERS’ SELF-IMAGES
This ethnographic study explores the extent to which written documents encoun-
tered in the modern workplace affect a company’s image and even the self-image
of the employees within that workplace. It also examines how the lack of written
documents in one workplace adversely affected the company image and led in
several cases to internal conflict and poor self-images among employees. This study
242   APPENDIX D

serves as a wake-up call for small businesses that have not yet developed an ex-
tensive written culture establishing formal written policies or setting goals and
norms. In the course of this project the author composed several policies, now
official, for his company.

PHOEBE—A PORTRAIT OF TWELVE ARTISTS AS A YOUNG 501C-3: AN ETHNOGRA-
PHY ON THE WORKPLACE CULTURE OF A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
This ethnography attempts to delineate some of the differences between a corpo-
rate workplace structure and a nonprofit workplace structure based upon the com-
munication that takes place there. Ethnographic observations on organizational
structures and corporate environments cannot be transposed to the not-for-profit
sector. As this ethnography demonstrates, a principle reason for employees to
choose to work in the nonprofit environment is knowing that their hard work is
making a difference in another writer’s life. It is the preservation of the craft of
writing that is the cause, the driving force, behind their efforts. There are very
different types of employees that are present in a nonprofit workplace, as a re-
sult. The nonprofit becomes a separate culture from other corporations because
of this artistic backbone of its structure and the mission as priority as opposed to
the almighty profit margin. As seen in the analysis of interoffice correspondence
via Internet, memorandums, and voice mail messages, the personalities of these
artists emerge. Staff members all have an idiosyncratic style and tone to their
correspondence, reflecting their mood, attitude, and individuality, as well as their
position within this unique structure.

RACHEL—THE WRITING CULTURE IN THE DEFENSE
ATTACHÉ SECTION OF AN EMBASSY
This study relates the writing culture in a defense attaché section of a foreign
embassy, in which much of the report writing is accomplished by attachés and
foreign language assistants (FLAs). This section of the embassy employs fourteen
military and ten civilian employees; because women may not serve in the country’s
armed forces, all of the military employees are male and all of the civilian em-
ployees are female. Because only attachés’ names may appear on reports, those
of the FLAs never appear, rendering much of their work invisible and the grounds
upon which they might request increases in the pay scale unsolid. Because the local
culture is anchored in a highly authoritarian tradition of the military, these is-
sues of inequity are not likely to be resolved.

RAVI—CONVENTIONS: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
OF THE CORPORATE CULTURE AT “SOFTDEV”
In a business world where conventions such as working nine to five and having
a set lunch break every day have become commonplace, it is difficult to imagine
a corporate culture that diverges from this well-laid path. The stark, rigid angles
of cubicle walls have become the foundation for America’s corporate world, and
the accepted conventions of working in this world have become nearly as rigid.
Yet there are companies that enjoy a different sort of corporate culture—like
SoftDev. The corporate culture of an organization can reveal itself to observers
in many ways—but for this particular study, I focus on the topic of writing pro-
cesses at SoftDev and outline how they can illuminate the nuances of this corpo-
rate culture in terms of office hierarchy, meetings, office hours, and dress code. I
show that the deliberate flouting of conventions such as hierarchical culture and
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES    243

carefully structured meetings actually feeds collaborative processes in develop-
ment and marketing writing.

RAY—POLICY WRITING IN A SMALL TOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT

My study of the implementation of a new vehicle response and pursuit policy for
a small town police department mostly involved the observation of police depart-
ment employees in their daily routine surrounding the policy’s development. As
the department’s policy manual writer and editor, I was provided with the op-
portunity to observe closely the department’s administrative staff as the policy
moved toward completion. Observations of staff meetings to discuss policy and
reflections on private meetings with the chief about this policy reveal a culture
that is strongly oral, with stories used to solidify alliances within the culture. As
a writer in this culture, I became positioned as the one who was responsible for
the policy rather than the one who was consolidating decisions and mandates in
written form.

RED—THE SCRIBNER: A STUDY OF NEWSROOM CULTURE
The Scribner is growing during a time when the newspaper industry is dissolv-
ing. Although the Scribner is growing, its newsroom faces internal and external
pressures that have adversely affected morale and now threaten the quality of the
Scribner’s chain of newspapers. This study shows how some of the pressures are
uncontrollable because they have developed outside the company in the newspa-
per marketplace. But others have been misapplied by the Scribner owners and
should be eliminated. And still others have developed inside the newsroom be-
cause of conflicting personalities and a lack of communication among the edito-
rial staff. This ethnography presents an account of these pressures—how they
originated, how they affect the people’s writing and how they should be dealt with
in this newsroom culture.

REX—THE BOUNDARIES OF LANGUAGE: INDEXERS’ WRITING
CULTURE AT A NATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE
Through observations and interviews, I studied the thirty full-time employees that
index and abstract illustrations at a prestigious national monthly magazine. As
the study progressed, it became clear that spatial boundaries established by work
spaces in certain clusters were mirrored by linguistic boundaries established be-
tween veteran and novice writers. In particular, standards for captions among vet-
erans dictated brevity, and transgressors of these standards (mostly novices) were
regularly chided for producing “novelettes.” In addition to these boundaries stood
boundaries between administrators and abstracters, who occasionally parodied
administrative jargon in jokes played upon one another.

SARAH—THE LONELINESS OF THE LONG-DISTANCE WRITER
AND OTHER MATTERS: FREELANCE WRITERS AT WORK
This project explores the working culture of freelance writers. Five writers were
interviewed in person, one by questionnaire, and background research was done
on the trend toward working at home. The following conclusions were reached:
(1) getting a freelance business started is difficult and the best way to do it is to
get a job as a writer and build up a freelance business part-time through those
contacts; (2) while freelance writing offers a tremendous amount of freedom and
244   APPENDIX D

diversity, the isolation of working alone at home is a problem for writers, even
those who are self-described “introverts”; (3) the workplace is changing rapidly
and new arrangements for getting the work done are gaining favor.

STARLA—CORPORATE COMMUNICATION OR
CORPORATE CONFUSION? AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY
As an MA student in professional writing and editing, I undertook a three-month
ethnographic study of my workplace culture while also operating as a full-time
member of that workplace—the corporate communications department of a large
financial services corporation. My study yielded observations of the confusion
that abounds in a writing culture where the lines of authority are not tightly drawn
as well as the confusion caused when the role of the corporate communications
department, both as it relates to senior management and to internal communica-
tion to employees, is in question. My study also included observations regarding
the exacerbating effect of immense change, both internal and external to the
company I studied, on the above areas of ambiguity. The study concludes that,
as communication is of utmost importance to the goals and objectives of a com-
pany, the lack of communication at the company I studied—and at corporations
across the board—should be evaluated and addressed.

SUE—WRITING PROCEDURES AND MORALE
IN A GOVERNMENT/MILITARY FIELD OFFICE

From February to May 1996, I have been studying my workplace and identify-
ing reasons why the morale has been so low there. There are many factors—per-
sonalities, management’s mistreatment of its employees, personal problems, and
so on—but the hardest hitting one is that the “systems” which have been set up
to support us have broken down, and they have yet to be fixed. These systems
have to do with the publication of reports, known here as Generic Documents
(GD). Tracking these reports from inception to publication revealed numerous
moments in the chain of command which allowed people to shirk their format-
ting and review responsibilities—in some cases for personal reasons and in oth-
ers for reasons stemming from long-standing feuds in the local culture. When a
shift from paper to paperless environment was introduced, some turnaround times
within the office were reduced, but turnaround times among offices were actu-
ally heightened because of incompatible systems. This issue remains unaddressed,
further undermining morale.

TESS—A WRITER’S SEARCH FOR MEANING IN THE WORKPLACE
This study is a reflective assessment of myself as a writer, whereby I compare two
different cultures in which I worked. The first is HappyTravel, a travel agency
serving primarily government, where I worked as a writer of internal publications
in the communications department. Here I encountered a highly oral culture in
which many of my routine questions such as “who is our audience?” were met
with surprise and even suspicion. I was laid off from this job while conducting
this study, prompting reflections on my former job as an assistant editor in the
publications department of an association. There, the culture was more immersed
in written production and knowledgeable of the intricate processes underlying
good writing and editing. More significantly, perhaps, the association culture relied
on written representations to sustain itself, whereas HappyTravel generated much
of its business over the phone.
                            RESEARCHERS’ ABSTRACTS OF WORKPLACE ETHNOGRAPHIES   245

TOM—THE REVELATIONS OF ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATIVE MEMORANDA

In this brief paper the power-base relationships of a large community college sys-
tem are revealed when the ethnographer attempts to analyze the written commu-
nications of the college senate. The senate is a body of employees formed from
the three levels of employees—teaching faculty, administrative faculty, and clas-
sified staff—to represent the college community as a whole and to advise the
college president of their issues and concerns. Memos composed by the senate
chair (and edited by this researcher) reveal word choices subtly recalling earlier
discussions of topics in full senate meetings yet situating these topics to leverage
action on them now, selectively representing earlier discussions depending upon
the audience for the memo.
WORKS CITED


Althusser, Louis. “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses.” Lenin and
     Philosophy and Other Essays. Trans. Ben Brewster. London: New Left
     Books, 1971.
Anderson, Gary L., and Patricia Irvine. “Informing Critical Literacy with Eth-
     nography.” Critical Literacy: Politics, Praxis, and the Postmodern. Ed.
     Colin Lankshear and Peter L. McLaren. Albany: State U of New York P,
     1993. 81–104.
Anson, Chris M. “Distant Voices: Teaching and Writing in a Culture of Tech-
     nology.” College English 61 (1999):261–80.
Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Behar, Ruth. “Introduction: Out of Exile.” Women Writing Culture. Ed. Ruth
     Behar and Deborah Gordon. Berkeley: U of California P, 1995. 1–29.
Behar, Ruth, and Deborah Gordon, eds. Women Writing Culture. Berkeley: U
     of California P, 1995.
Belenky, Mary Field, Blythe McVicker Clinchy, Nancy Rule Goldberger, and
     Jill Mattuck Tarule. Women’s Ways of Knowing. New York: Basic Books,
     1997.
Belsey, Catherine. Critical Practice. London: Methuen, 1980.
Bennett, Tony. “Putting Policy into Cultural Studies.” Cultural Studies. Ed.
     Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula Treichler. New York:
     Routledge, 1992. 23–37.
Bennett, Tony, and Janet Woollacott. Bond and Beyond: The Political Career
     of a Cultural Hero. New York: Methuen, 1987.
Berlin, James A. “English Studies, Work, and Politics in the New Economy.”
     Composition in the Twenty-First Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z.
     Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern
     Illinois UP, 1996. 215–25.
———. Rhetoric and Reality: Writing Instruction in American Colleges,
     1900–1985. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1987.
———. Rhetorics, Poetics, and Cultures: Refiguring College English Studies.
     Urbana: NCTE, 1996.
———. “The Teacher as Researcher: Democracy, Dialogue, and Power.” The
     Writing Teacher as Researcher: Essays in the Theory and Practice of
     Class-Based Research. Ed. Donald A. Daiker and Max Morenberg.
     Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, 1990. 3–14.
Bourdieu, Pierre, and Jean-Claude Passeron. Reproduction in Education,
     Society, and Culture. 2nd ed. London: SAGE, 1990.
Brady, Laura. “A Contextual Theory for Business Writing.” Journal of
     Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993): 452–71.



                                                                           247
248   WORKS CITED

Brandt, Deborah. “Sponsors of Literacy.” College Composition and Commu-
     nication 49 (1998): 165–85.
Braudel, Fernand. The Identity of France. Trans. Siân Reynolds. New York:
     Harper & Row, 1988.
Britton, James, Tony Burgess, Nancy Martin, Alex McLeod, and Harold
     Rosen. The Development of Writing Abilities (11–18). London: Mac-
     millan, 1975.
Brodkey, Linda. “Modernism and the Scene(s) of Writing.” College English 49
     (1987): 396–418.
———. “On the Subjects of Class and Gender in ‘The Literacy Letters.’”
     College English 51 (1989): 125–41.
Brodkey, Linda, and Jim Henry. “Voice Lessons in a Poststructural Key: Notes
     on Response and Revision.” A Rhetoric of Doing: Essays on Written
     Discourse in Honor of James L. Kinneavy. Ed. Stephen P. Witte, Neil
     Nakadate, and Roger Cherry. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992.
     144–60.
Brown, Robert L., Jr. and Carl G. Herndl. “An Ethnographic Study of Cor-
     porate Writing: Job Status as Reflected in Written Text.” Functional
     Approaches to Writing: Research Perspectives. Ed. Barbara Couture.
     London: Frances Pinter, 1986. 11–28.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Table 2: Employment by occupation, 1996 and
     projected 2006. 4 July 1999.
     <http://www.fedstats.gov/index20.html>
———. Table 11: Employed persons by detailed occupation, sex, race, and
     Hispanic origin. 4 July 1999.
     <ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/lf/aat11.txt>
Burnett, Rebecca E. “Substantive Conflict in a Cooperative Context: A Way to
     Improve the Collaborative Planning of Workplace Documents.” Technical
     Communication 38 (1991): 532–39.
Chartier, Roger. The Order of Books. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1994.
Chatman, Seymour. Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and
     Film. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1978.
Clifford, James. “Introduction: Partial Truths.” Writing Culture: The Poetics
     and Politics of Ethnography. Ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus.
     Berkeley: U of California P, 1986. 1–26.
Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus, eds. Writing Culture: The Poetics and
     Politics of Ethnography. Berkeley: U of California P, 1986.
Couture, Barbara. “Categorizing Professional Discourse: Engineering, Admin-
     istrative, and Technical/Professional Writing.” Journal of Business and
     Technical Communication 6 (1992): 5–37.
Crowley, Sharon. Composition in the University: Historical and Polemical
     Essays. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1998.
———. “writing and Writing.” Writing and Reading Differently: Decon-
     struction and the Teaching of Composition and Literature. Ed. Douglas
     Atkins and Michael L. Johnson. Lawrence: UP of Kansas, 1985. 93–100.
Dark, Ken A. Theoretical Archaeology. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1995.
Davenport, Thomas. Information Ecology. New York: Oxford UP, 1997.
Debs, Mary Beth. “Corporate Authority: Sponsoring Rhetorical Practice.”
     Writing in the Workplace: New Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka.
     Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1993. 158–70.
                                                              WORKS CITED   249

Dias, Patrick, Aviva Freedman, Peter Medway, and Anthony Paré. Worlds
    Apart: Acting and Writing in Academic and Workplace Contexts.
    Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999.
Eisner, Elliot W., and Elizabeth Vallance. “Five Concepts of Curriculum: Their
    Roots and Implications for Curriculum Planning.” Conflicting Concepts
    of Curriculum. Ed. Elliot W. Eisner and Elizabeth Vallance. Berkeley:
    McCutchan, 1974. 1–18.
Elbow, Peter. “Closing My Eyes as I Speak: An Argument for Ignoring
    Audience.” College English 49 (1987): 50–69.
Emig, Janet. “Writing as a Mode of Learning.” College Composition and
    Communication 28 (1977): 122–28.
Faigley, Lester. Fragments of Rationality: Postmodernity and the Subject of
    Composition. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1992.
Forman, Janis, ed. New Visions of Collaborative Writing. Portsmouth, NH:
    Boynton/Cook, 1992.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on
    Language. New York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
———. “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected
    Essays and Interviews by Michel Foucault. Ed. Donald R. Bouchard.
    Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1977. 101–20.
Freed, Richard. “Postmodern Practice: Perspectives and Prospects.” Profes-
    sional Communication: The Social Perspective. Ed. Nancy Roundy Blyler
    and Charlotte Thralls. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993. 196–14.
Frow, John. Cultural Studies and Cultural Value. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.
Garay, Mary Sue, and Stephen A. Bernhardt, eds. Expanding Literacies:
    English Teaching and the New Workplace. Albany: State U of New York
    P, 1998.
Gere, Anne Ruggles. “Kitchen Tables and Rented Rooms: The Extracurricu-
    lum of Composition.” College Composition and Communication 45
    (1994): 75–92.
Goswami, Dixie, and Peter R. Stillman, eds. Reclaiming the Classroom:
    Teacher Research as an Agency for Change. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/
    Cook, 1987.
Gregory, Kathleen L. “Nature-View Paradigms: Multiple Cultures and Culture
    Conflicts in Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983):
    359–76.
Haas, Christina. Writing Technology: Studies on the Materiality of Literacy.
    Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
Hall, Stuart. “On Postmodernism and Articulation: An Interview with Stuart
    Hall.” Journal of Communication Inquiry 10 (1986): 45–60.
Harding, Sandra. “Introduction: Is There a Feminist Method?” Feminism and
    Methodology. Ed. Sandra Harding. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1987. 1–14.
Harvey, David. The Condition of Postmodernity. London: Blackwell, 1989.
Hayano, David M. “Auto-Ethnography: Paradigms, Problems, and Prospects.”
    Human Organization 38 (1979): 99–104.
Henry, Jim. “Documenting Contributory Expertise: The Value Added by
    Technical Communicators in Collaborative Writing Situations” Technical
    Communication 45 (1998): 207–20.
———. “Teaching Technical Authorship.” Technical Communication Quar-
    terly 4 (1995): 261–84.
250   WORKS CITED

———. “Toward Technical Authorship.” Journal of Technical Writing and
      Communication 24 (1994): 449–61.
Henry, Jim, and “George.” “Workplace Ghostwriting.” Journal of Business
      and Technical Communication 9 (1995): 425–45.
Herndl, Carl G. “Teaching Discourse and Reproducing Culture: A Critique of
      Research and Pedagogy in Professional and Non-Academic Writing.”
      College Composition and Communication 44 (1993): 349–63.
Holmes, Urban T., Jr. “Transitions in European Education.” Twelfth-Century
      Europe and the Foundations of Modern Society. Ed. Marshall Clagett, Gaines
      Post, and Robert Reynolds. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1966. 15–38.
hooks, bell. yearning: race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South End
      Press, 1990.
Hull, Glynda. “Hearing Other Voices: A Critical Assessment of Popular Views
      on Literacy and Work. Changing Work, Changing Workers: Critical
      Perspectives on Language, Literacy, and Skills. Ed. Glynda Hull. Albany,
      NY: State U of New York P, 1997. 3–39.
Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
      Durham: Duke UP, 1991.
Johannsen, Agneta M. “Applied Anthropology and Post-Modernist Ethnogra-
      phy.” Human Organization 51 (1992): 71–81.
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan. Nostalgic Angels: Rearticulating Hypertext Writing.
      Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company, 1997.
———. “Relocating the Value of Work: Technical Communication in a Post-
      Industrial Age.” Technical Communication Quarterly 5 (1996): 245–70.
Jolliffe, David. “Finding Yourself in the Text: Identity Formation in the
      Discourse of Workplace Documents. Changing Work, Changing Workers:
      Critical Perspectives on Language, Literacy, and Skills. Ed. Glynda Hull.
      Albany: State U of New York P, 1997. 335–49.
Katz, Steven. “The Ethic of Expediency: Classical Rhetoric, Technology, and
      the Holocaust.” College English 54 (1992): 255–75.
Katz, Susan M. The Dynamics of Writing Review: Opportunities for Growth
      and Change in the Workplace. Stamford: Ablex, 1998.
Kenyatta, Jomo. Facing Mount Kenya. London: Secker and Warburg, 1938.
Kinneavy, James L. A Theory of Discourse. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
      Hall, 1971.
Kirsch, Gesa. “Methodological Pluralism.” Methods and Methodology in
      Composition Research. Ed. Gesa Kirsch and Patricia A. Sullivan. Car-
      bondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992. 247–69.
Kirsch, Gesa E., and Joy S. Ritchie. “Beyond the Personal: Theorizing a
      Politics of Location in Composition Research.” College Composition and
      Communication 46 (1995): 7–29.
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. “Mistaken Dichotomies.” Journal of Ameri-
      can Folklore 101 (1988): 140–55.
Kleimann, Susan. “The Reciprocal Relationship of Workplace Culture and
      Review.” Writing in the Workplace: New Research Perspectives. Ed.
      Rachel Spilka. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993. 56–70.
Kliebard, Herbert M. The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1893–1958.
      New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987.
Kondo, Dorinne. “Bad Girls: Theater, Women of Color, and the Politics of
      Representation.” Women Writing Culture. Ed. Ruth Behar and Deborah
      Gordon. Berkeley: U of California P, 1995. 49–64.
                                                             WORKS CITED   251

Kushner, Tony. Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes. Part
     One: Millennium Approaches. New York: Theatre Communications
     Group, 1993.
Lacan, Jacques. Ecrits: A Selection. New York: Norton, 1977.
Lanham, Richard. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the
     Arts. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1993.
Lather, Patti. Getting Smart: Feminist Research and Pedagogy with/in the
     Postmodern. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Lay, Mary M. and William M. Karis, eds. Collaborative Writing in Industry:
     Investigations in Theory and Practice. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1991.
Lay, Mary M., Billie J. Wahlstrom, Carolyn Rude, Cindy Selfe, and Jack Selzer.
     Technical Communication. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Leggo, Carl. “Questions I Need to Ask before I Advise My Students to Write
     in Their Own Voices.” Rhetoric Review 10 (1991): 143–52.
Lionnet, Françoise. “Autoethnography: The An-Archic Style of Dust Tracks
     on a Road.” Reading Black, Reading Feminist. Ed. Henry Louis Gates.
     New York: Meridian Press, 1990. 382–414.
Lunsford, Andrea Abernathy. “Rhetoric, Feminism, and the Politics of Textual
     Ownership.” College English 61 (1999): 529–44.
Lunsford, Andrea, and Lisa Ede. “Collaborative Authorship and the Teaching
     of Writing.” The Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in
     Law and Literature. Ed. Martha Woodmansee and Peter Jaszi. Durham:
     Duke UP, 1994. 417–38.
———. Singular Texts/Plural Authors: Perspectives on Collaborative Writing.
     Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1990.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
     Trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: U of Minne-
     sota P, 1984.
Martin, Henri-Jean. The History and Power of Writing. Trans. Lydia G.
     Cochrane. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1994.
McBeth, Sally. “Myths of Objectivity and the Collaborative Process in Life
     History Research.” When They Read What We Write: The Politics of
     Ethnography. Ed. Caroline B. Brettell. Westport: Bergin, 1993. 145–62.
Miller, Carolyn R. “Learning from History: World War II and the Culture of
     High Technology.” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 12
     (1998): 288–315.
———. “What’s Practical about Technical Writing?” Technical Writing:
     Theory and Practice. Ed. Bertie E. Fearing and W. Keats Sparrow. New
     York: MLA, 1989. 14–24.
Miller, Richard E. “Fault Lines in the Contact Zone.” College English 56
     (1994): 389–408.
Miller, Susan. Textual Carnivals: The Politics of Composition. Carbondale:
     Southern Illinois UP, 1991.
Miller, Thomas P. “Treating Professional Writing as Social Praxis.” Journal of
     Advanced Composition 11 (1991): 57–72.
Morgan, Meg, and Mary Murray. “Insight and Collaborative Writing.”
     Collaborative Writing in Industry: Investigations in Theory and Practice.
     Ed. Mary M. Lay and William M. Karis. Amityville, NY: Baywood, 1991.
     64–81.
Odell, Lee, and Dixie Goswami, ed. Writing in Nonacademic Settings. New
     York: Guilford, 1985.
252   WORKS CITED

Parker, William Riley. “Where Do English Departments Come From?” College
     English 28 (1967): 339–51.
Phelps, Louise Wetherbee. “Audience and Authorship: The Disappearing
     Boundary.” A Sense of Audience in Written Communication. Ed. Gesa
     Kirsch and Duane H. Roen. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990.
Piwowarczyk, Mary Ann. “The Narratee and the Situation of Enunciation: A
     Reconsideration of Prince’s Theory.” Genre 9 (1976): 161–77.
Porter, James E. “Developing a Postmodern Ethics of Rhetoric and Composi-
     tion.” Defining the New Rhetorics. Ed. Theresa Enos and Stuart C.
     Brown. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993. 207–26.
Porter, James E., and Patricia Sullivan. “Working Across Methodological
     Interfaces: The Study of Computers and Writing in the Workplace.”
     Electronic Literacies in the Workplace. Ed. Patricia Sullivan and Jennie
     Dautermann. Urbana: NCTE, 1996. 294–322.
Pratt, Mary Louise. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 91. New York:
     MLA, 1991. 33–40.
Prince, Gerald. A Dictionary of Narratology. Lincoln: U of Nebraska P, 1987.
———. “Introduction to the Study of the Narratee.” Reader Response
     Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism. Ed. Jane P. Tompkins.
     Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 1980. 7–25.
Reagan, Sally Barr, Thomas Fox, and David Bleich. Writing With: New
     Directions in Collaborative Teaching, Learning, and Research. Albany:
     State U of New York P, 1994.
Reich, Robert. The Work of Nations. New York: Vintage, 1992.
Rosaldo, Renato. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis.
     Boston: Beacon Press, 1993.
Russell, David R. Writing in the Academic Disciplines, 1870–1990: A Curricu-
     lar History. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1991.
Schein, Edgar H. “Organizational Culture.” American Psychologist 45 (1990):
     109–19.
Selber, Stuart A. “Beyond Skill Building: Challenges Facing Technical Commu-
     nication Teachers in the Computer Age.” Technical Communication
     Quarterly 3 (1994): 365–90.
Selber, Stuart A., Dan McGavin, William Klein, and Johndan Johnson-Eilola.
     “Issues in Hypertext-Supported Collaborative Writing.” Nonacademic
     Writing: Social Theory and Technology. Ed. Ann Hill Duin and Craig J.
     Hansen. Mahwah: Erlbaum. 257–80.
Selfe, Cynthia L. “Theorizing E-mail for the Practice, Instruction, and Study of
     Literacy.” Electronic Literacies in the Workplace. Ed. Patricia Sullivan
     and Jennie Dautermann. Urbana: NCTE, 1996. 255–93.
Selfe, Cynthia L., and Richard J. Selfe Jr. “Writing as Democratic Social
     Action in a Technological World: Politicizing and Inhabiting Virtual
     Landscapes.” Nonacademic Writing: Social Theory and Technology. Ed.
     Ann Hill Duin and Craig J. Hansen. Mahwah: Erlbaum. 325–58.
Selzer, Jack. “Intertextuality and the Writing Process: An Overview.” Writing
     in the Workplace:New Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka. Car-
     bondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1993. 171–80.
Silverman, David, and Brian Torode. The Material Word: Some Theories of
     Language and its Limits. London: Routledge, 1980.
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, David James Miller, and Jeffrey Doak. “The Technical
     Communicator as Author: Meaning, Power, Authority.” Journal of
     Business and Technical Communication 7 (1993): 12–36.
                                                             WORKS CITED   253

Slevin, James. “Disciplining Students: Whom Should Composition Teach and
     What Should They Know?” Composition in the Twenty-First Century:
     Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z. Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward
     M. White. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1996. 153–65.
Society for Technical Communication. Special Section: Measuring the Value
     Added by Professional Technical Communicators. Technical Communica-
     tion 42 (1995): 23–83.
Spellmeyer, Kurt. “Foucault and the Freshman Writer: Considering the Self in
     Discourse.” College English 51 (1989): 715–29.
———. “Inventing the University Student.” Composition in the Twenty-First
     Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z. Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and
     Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1996. 39–44.
Spilka, Rachel. “Influencing Workplace Practice: A Challenge for Professional
     Writing Specialists in the Academy.” Writing in the Workplace: New
     Research Perspectives. Ed. Rachel Spilka. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
     UP, 1993. 207–19.
Stewart, Donald C. “Two Model Teachers and the Harvardization of English
     Departments.” The Rhetorical Tradition and Modern Writing. Ed. James
     J. Murphy. New York: MLA, 1982. 118–29.
Sullivan, Patricia A. “Feminism and Methodology in Composition Studies.”
     Methods and Methodology in Composition Research. Ed. Gesa Kirsch
     and Patricia A. Sullivan. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992. 37–61.
Sullivan, Patricia A., and James E. Porter. “Remapping Curricular Geography:
     Professional Writing in/and English.” Journal of Business and Technical
     Communication 7 (1993): 389–422.
Taylor, Frederick W. The Principles of Scientific Management. New York:
     Harper & Brothers, 1911.
Trimbur, John. “Writing Instruction and the Politics of Professionalization.”
     Composition in the Twenty-First Century: Crisis and Change. Ed. Lynn Z.
     Bloom, Donald A. Daiker, and Edward M. White. Carbondale: Southern
     Illinois UP, 1996. 133–45.
Tufte, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire: Graphics Press, 1990.
Van Maanen, John, and Stephen R. Barley. “Occupational Communities:
     Culture and Control in Organizations.” Research in Organizational
     Behavior. Ed. B. M. Straw and L. L. Cummings Greenwich, CT: JAI
     Press, 1984.
van Slyck, Phyllis. “Repositioning Ourselves in the Contact Zones.” College
     English 59 (1997): 149–70.
Virilio, Paul. Speed and Politics: An Essay on Domology. Trans. M. Polizzotti.
     New York: Semiotext(e), 1986.
White, Hayden. The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical
     Representation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1987.
Winsor, Dorothy. “Owning Corporate Texts.” Journal of Business and
     Technical Communication 7 (1993): 179–95.
Woodmansee, Martha. “On the Author Effect: Recovering Collectivity.” The
     Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in Law and Litera-
     ture. Ed. Martha Woodmansee and Peter Jaszi. Durham: Duke UP,
     1994. 1–14.
Yates, JoAnne. Control through Communication: The Rise of System in
     American Management. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1989.
Young, Richard E., Alton L. Becker, and Kenneth L. Pike. Rhetoric: Discovery
     and Change. New York: Harcourt, 1970.
254   WORKS CITED

Zebroski, James Thomas, and Nancy Mack. “Ethnographic Writing for
    Critical Consciousness.” Social Issues in the English Classroom. Ed.
    C. Mark Hurlbert and Samuel Totten. Urbana: NCTE, 1992. 269–82.
Zuboff, Shoshana. In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work
    and Power. New York: Basic Books, 1988.
INDEX

Adam, 39, 40, 41, 55, 85, 97, 103, 105,            59, 81, 117, 133, 153; organizational,
   124, 187, 189, 211, 221                         172–73, 182, 183–84; and ownership,
Adria, 40, 42, 55, 73, 76, 79, 85–86, 95,          45; as a sociological function, 30, 143;
   101, 103, 187, 189, 211, 221                    technical, 143, 145; theories of, 12, 16–
agency: as circumscribed by cultural and dis-      17, 19–20, 29–34, 45, 142
   cursive practices, 2, 28, 45–46, 120,        autoethnography, 49–67, 92–93, 126, 131,
   151; as implied, 124; intermediary, 155–        180
   58; obfuscation of, 149; in stabilization
   and change, 86, 89; among subject po-        Barthes, Roland, 16, 142
   sitions, 97, 125–26                          Behar, Ruth, 24, 162
Albert, 37, 42, 55, 58, 73, 95–96, 103, 135,    Belenky, Mary Field, et al., 174
   153, 187, 189–90, 214, 221–22                Belmont Report, 7
Alice, 37, 38, 39, 63, 85–86, 95, 99, 176,      Belsey, Catherine, 122, 124, 167
   188, 190, 218, 222                           Bergoffen, Debra, 9, 24
Althusser, Louis, 16, 123                       Berlin, James, 2, 7, 115, 117
Amy, 95, 100, 187, 190, 211, 222                Bernie, 37, 42, 60, 61, 75, 87, 101, 103,
Ana, 27–28, 58, 75, 79, 82, 85, 87, 95, 101,        139–40, 187, 192, 216, 224
   103, 105, 187, 190, 214, 222                 Bourdieu, Pierre, and Jean-Claude Passeron,
Andrew, 41, 42, 63, 85, 187, 191, 218, 223          164
Angels in America (Kushner), 161, 172, 182      Branden, 15, 21, 25–27, 39, 57, 58, 79, 95,
Anita, 37, 39, 41, 58, 75, 95, 101, 105, 187,       100, 105, 183, 188, 192, 215, 224
   191, 215, 223                                Brandt, Deborah, 174
Ann, 29–31, 39, 40, 54, 75, 76, 95, 97, 100,    Braudel, Fernand, 130
   105, 174, 187, 191, 211, 223                 Brenda, 37–39, 41, 58, 60, 76, 79, 80, 95,
Anne, 15, 20, 21, 63, 87, 95, 103, 188, 192,        187, 192, 216, 224
   218, 223–24                                  Britton, James, et al., 147
anthropology: applied, 163; epistemology        Brodkey, Linda, 38, 91, 123, 173
   of, 1, 7–9, 50–52                            Bureau of Labor, 32, 44
archaeological digs: and classification of      Burr, Zofia, 179, 181
   shards, 35; and hypertext excavations,
   10; processes for conducting, 9; shards      Carolyn, 41, 42, 55, 75, 79, 95, 97, 103,
   in, 9                                            187, 188, 192, 211, 225
audience: advocacy for, 147; and author-        Cass, 37, 41, 42, 57, 58, 82, 101, 105, 187,
   ship, 131, 170–71; multiple, 63, 65;             193, 215, 225
   public as, 57, 58, 65; serial, 63, 65. See   Challie, 43, 61, 62, 85, 95, 126, 151, 187,
   also reader                                      188, 193, 216, 225
author: death of, 16, 142; function, 26, 118;   Chatman, Seymour, 20, 147
   implied, 12, 19–22, 26, 74, 144, 148;        Chet, 39–41, 54, 76, 79, 97, 103, 105, 187–
   real, 19–22, 112, 146, 148, 165                  88, 193, 211, 225–26
authorship: and audience, 131, 179–81; and      Clifford, James, 1, 3, 166
   authority, 12, 134; collaborative, 38, 42,   cognitive mapping, 71–72


                                                                                        255
256    INDEX

collaboration, xiii, 42, 44, 58, 59, 64, 81;           “multilayerdness” of, 114; multiple
    and collective reports, 58; and individual         forms of, 98–100, 123–24, 151–52; of-
    contributions, 58. See also authorship, col-       ficial organizational, 100; “performa-
    laborative; composition, collaborative             tive” model of, 114; and points of appli-
Communications Decency Act, 172                        cation, 26; political, 58–59; postmodern
community colleges, 86, 177                            theories of, 91–92, 114–15; and prac-
composition: and affect, 39–43, 102–5, 112,            tices and traditions, 16; products, 97–
    121–22; collaborative, 38, 42, 58–59,              98; racist, 93, 101; sexist, 93, 101, 103;
    132–34, 154–55; computerized, 134–                 sites of, 9; specialists, 119; studies, 120–
    36; current-traditional, 2–4, 30–32; cur-          27; of surveillance, 80, 104, 129; twen-
    ricular alternatives, 128; deficit models          tieth-century, 10, 20; underlying, 100–
    of, 18; and discursive experience, ix–xi,          102, 123–24, 151–52; unities of, 24,
    3–4, 31; expressivism, 112–13; episte-             88–89, 93; vague, 63, 73–74, 87, 96
    mology, 4, 6, 17, 30–32, 43–46, 65, 108,       discursive constructions: of the “I,” 4, 15–
    117, 140–42, 183; and ethos, 126, 149;             16, 31, 121–26, 165–68; of the “other,”
    as a field, 16, 119; and hypertext, 130–           125–26, 136, 166; of the “self,” 16–18,
    31; in modernist modes, 120; in post-              20, 26, 125–26, 133, 136, 166
    modern modes, 120–27, 135; process             discursive formations, 16, 26, 36–46, 119,
    pedagogy, x, 120–26; and research pa-              132, 180
    pers, 3                                        Doak, Jeffrey, 69, 70, 143–44
Conference on College Composition and              document processes, 78–81, 89, 153–55
    Communication, 149, 183                        domain of professional authorship, 146–
contact zones, 51, 119, 126, 180–81                    49
Corinne, 39–42, 60, 87, 95, 97, 187, 193,
    217, 226                                       Ede, Lisa, 132–33
Crowley, Sharon, 2, 30–32, 120, 122, 126,          Elaine, 40, 55, 73, 82, 95, 97, 99, 103, 188,
    128, 142, 183                                      194, 212, 227
cultural reproduction, 98, 151                     Ella, 41–42, 55, 75–76, 79, 82, 87, 95, 103,
cultures, codex, 4                                     105, 167, 194, 212, 227
curriculum: “academic rationalist,” 127;           Ellie, 39, 54, 73, 76, 79, 95, 187, 205, 213,
    and “extracurriculum,” 176–77; “geog-              241
    raphies of,” 32–33, 118; of professional       Emma, 37, 39, 63, 82, 95, 176, 195, 218,
    writing, 127–36; and “self-actualiza-              228
    tion,” 127–128, 164; “social-efficiency,”      English: and belles lettres, 3; departments of,
    4; social reconstruction, 164                      ix–x, 3, 32–33, 129, 137
                                                   ethnography: performative, 162, 179; theo-
Daisy, 37, 39, 40–42, 76, 79–80, 95, 103,              ry, 50–52
    187, 194, 211, 226                             ethos, 126, 149–58, 167
Debs, Mary Beth, 69, 70, 139, 156, 177             expressivism. See composition
Department of Commerce, 27, 57
Derrida, Jacques, 15, 181                          Faigley, Lester, 2, 28, 118
Diane, 41, 60, 75, 82, 95, 98–99, 101, 103,        feminism, 23, 162, 174, 182
    105, 187, 194, 217, 226–27                     folklore, 65–66
discourse: academic, 95; administrative, 105;      Foucault, Michel, xi, 8–10, 24, 26, 29–30
    analysis, xi; authoritarian, 104; commu-       Frow, John, 44, 111–13, 119, 125, 159, 169
    nity, 82, 94, 99–100, 107; critical rela-
    tionship with, 15, 184; definitions of, 92;    Gary, 37, 39, 55, 73, 87, 95, 97–98, 101,
    effects of, 102–6; events of, 9; first-per-       146, 170, 188, 195, 212, 227–28
    son, 4; and formations, 26; forms of, 94–      General Accounting Office, 154
    102; heterosexist, 101; instrumental, xi,      George, 37, 40, 57–59, 75, 79–80, 100–
    11, 106; management, 101–3; market,               101, 103, 105, 158, 175–76, 187, 195,
    101; modernist theories of, 114–16;               215, 228
                                                                                 INDEX     257

Ginger, 40–42, 55, 75, 82, 87, 98, 105, 187,     Joanne, 40, 42, 55, 73, 76, 79, 82, 95, 187,
   195, 212, 228                                     199, 212, 233
Gloria, 39–42, 57–58, 73, 82, 95–97, 176,        Joe, 39, 42, 55, 76, 95, 97–98, 187, 199–
   187, 196, 215, 228–29                             200, 212, 233–34
Grace, 37–38, 41, 73, 79–80, 82, 95, 105,        Johnson-Eilola, Johndan, 44, 130, 134–35,
   187, 196, 217, 229                                153
Gwen, 37–39, 41–42, 58, 73, 75, 95, 103–         Jolliffe, David, 124
   4, 121, 154, 187, 196, 215, 229               Jones, Grace, 161–62, 182
                                                 journals, 87, 121, 124. See also self-docu-
Hart, 37, 39, 63, 82–83, 95, 97, 156, 187,           mentation
    196, 218, 229–30                             Julie, 63, 95, 99, 176, 188, 200, 219, 234
Harvard model, ix, 3
Harvey, David, 178, 180                          Kali, 58, 75, 82, 87, 95, 101, 103, 178, 187,
Hayano, David, 49, 89                               200, 215, 234
Heather, 37, 60, 75, 85, 103, 105, 187, 197,     Karla, 38, 40, 60, 75, 79–80, 95, 97, 101,
    217, 230                                        105, 187, 200, 217, 234–35
Helen, 30, 41, 58, 61, 73, 79–80, 95, 97–        Kate, 63, 73, 82, 87, 95, 99, 188, 200–201,
    98, 176, 187, 197, 215, 230                     219, 235
heuristics, in interpreting data, 11             Kelly, 39, 41–42, 63, 76, 79–80, 82, 85–86,
hierarchy: flattened, 116–17, 134, 171; and         103, 187–88, 201, 219, 235
    information flow, 81, 88, 152, 185–86        Kenyata, Jomo, 50
Holly, 39, 41, 55, 57, 79, 85, 95, 103, 105,     Kirsten, 37, 39, 41–42, 60–61, 73, 76, 79,
    187, 197, 212, 230                              82, 95, 101, 103, 187, 201, 218, 235
Hurston, Zora Neale, 51–52, 66, 126              Kolar, 58–59, 73, 75, 85, 87, 95, 101, 105,
                                                    187, 201, 216, 236
identities: subjective, 52; subjective work,     Kondo, Dorinne, 161–62, 179
    52, 66                                       Kushner, Tony, 161, 182
ideology: as symbolic representations, 124–      Kyle, 37–39, 41, 60, 62, 73, 79–80, 95, 97,
    27, 156; zero-sum, 88                           103, 105, 176, 187, 201, 218, 236
“informating,” 134
information workers, 111, 113                    Lacan, Jacques, 16
“interdiscursivity,” 124                         Lara, 63, 82, 95, 188, 201–2, 219, 236
intertextuality, 132, 146                        Lather, Patti, 122, 181
intervention, 161–84                             Leathe, 41, 55, 73, 76, 82, 95, 97, 116, 187,
Itsy, 37, 60, 95, 187, 197, 217, 230–31              202, 213, 236–37
                                                 Lee, 39, 42, 63, 86–87, 95, 176, 188, 202,
Jackie, 39, 41–42, 60–62, 76, 79–80, 82,             219, 237
     85, 95, 97–99, 105, 187–88, 197–98,         Leggo, Carl, 123
     217, 231                                    Leigh, 39, 41, 58–59, 73, 75–76, 79, 95,
Jan, 37, 60–61, 75, 85, 87, 95–96, 101, 187,         100, 103, 184, 187, 202, 216, 237
     198, 217, 231                               Lena, 60, 75, 79–80, 95, 97, 101, 105, 159,
Jane, 42, 58, 75, 79, 82, 95, 103, 105, 185,         187, 203, 218, 237–38
     198, 215, 231                               liberal humanism, ix, 3, 108
Janice, 37, 39, 54, 73, 85, 87, 95, 188, 198,    Library of Congress, 57, 96, 176
     212, 232                                    Lionnet, Françoise, 51
Jeff, 40–41, 55, 73, 75–76, 82–83, 95, 98–       Lisa, 39, 42, 55, 82–83, 95, 96, 101, 103,
     99, 105, 154, 175, 187, 198, 212, 232           175, 187–88, 203, 213, 238
Jen, 40, 55, 95, 97–99, 156, 187, 198–99,        literacy: demands in high-volume work-
     212, 232                                        place, ix, 5; projects, critical, 11, 177;
Jihad, 95–96, 105, 188, 199, 212, 233                sponsorship of, 174
Jillian, 39, 41, 63, 85–86, 95, 176, 188, 199,   Liz, 40, 57–58, 73, 75, 82, 187, 203, 216,
     219, 233                                        238
258   INDEX

logs. See journals                            policy, writing of, 58–59
Lois, 39, 42, 54–55, 82, 95–96, 98–99, 101,   Porter, James E., 11, 22, 32–33, 118, 147,
   105, 187, 203, 213, 238                       149–50
Lunsford, Andrea, 45, 132–33                  post-Fordism: and “flexibility” of labor, 43,
Lyotard, Jean-François, 10–11                    76, 111, 113, 178
                                              postmodernism, xi, 1–2, 11, 16–17, 91–93,
Mack, 40–42, 54–55, 95, 103, 187, 203–4,         114–15, 163; theoretical tenets and daily
   213, 239                                      life, 2
Maggie, 38–39, 41–42, 79, 95, 97, 103,        Prague Linguistics Circle, 147
   105, 187–88, 204, 213, 239                 Pratt, Mary Louise, 51, 162, 180
management: scientific, 4; systematic, 4      Prince, Gerald, 12, 19, 148
Mandy, 28, 37, 39, 60, 75, 79, 91–93, 101,    professional managerial class, 180
   103, 105, 187, 204, 218, 239               professional writing: and civic humanism,
Marla, 42, 63, 82, 105, 176, 187–88, 207,        174; curricula, 127–36; as a field, 33
   219, 239–40                                property, intellectual, 45
Martin, Henri-Jean, 131
Mary, 41–42, 55, 72, 79, 82, 95, 100, 103,    Rachel, 38, 40, 58, 75, 82, 95, 101, 103,
   105, 116, 187–88, 204, 213, 240                187, 207, 216, 242
May, 38, 42, 55, 75, 82, 95, 187, 205, 213,   Ravi, 40–41, 55, 73, 76, 82, 87, 95, 101,
   240                                            187, 207, 214, 242–43
Meese, Ed, 161, 172                           Ray, 40, 58, 73, 82–83, 95–96, 99, 103–5,
Meg, 37, 55, 73, 95, 101, 103, 105, 187,          187, 207, 216, 243
   205, 213, 240                              readability, 11, 144
Megan, 63, 73, 87, 95–97, 100, 187, 205,      reader: implied, 19–20, 144, 148; real, 19–
   219, 240–41                                    20, 148; response theory, 58. See also
Miller, Carolyn, 144, 152, 165                    audience
Miller, James, 69, 70, 143–44                 reading formations, 132, 180
Miller, Susan, 2, 28, 117                     Reagan, Ronald, 172, 192
Miyake, Issey, 162                            Red, 37, 39, 55, 73, 75–76, 79–80, 82–83,
Moylan, Tom, 111, 113                             95–96, 103, 131, 175, 187, 207, 214,
                                                  243
Nancy, 37, 54, 73, 76, 79, 95, 187, 205,      Reich, Robert, 5, 12, 115–16, 119, 129,
   213, 241                                       132–33
narratology, 19–22                            relationality, and social interests, 46, 157
New Criticism, 31                             representational practices, 45–46, 157–58,
Nidean, 15, 20–21, 42, 54, 73, 87, 95, 101,       179–80; and misrepresentation, 98; poli-
   105, 187, 206, 213, 241                        tics and poetics of, xi, 1, 50–52, 65–66,
Norma, 37, 39–40, 73, 95, 98, 187, 206,           161, 182; and “self” and “other,” 113
   214, 241                                   research: grounded, 23; informed intersub-
Nyck, 37, 39, 41, 55, 75–76, 85, 95, 103,         jective methodology, xi, 7; reflexivity
   175, 187, 206, 214, 241–42                     and, 66, 125; teacher, 7; on workplace
                                                  writing, xi, 7
Odell, Lee, and Dixie Goswami, 7              Rex, 39, 55, 73, 82–83, 95, 175, 187, 208,
organization: charts, 5, 168, 172; informa-       214, 243
   tion flows in, 81, 88, 152, 155–56; in     rhetoric: current-traditional, 3; departments
   national context, 5                            of, 3; postmodern, 3
organizational studies, 128–30                Rosaldo, Renato, 1, 156

petits recits, xi, 70–72, 92, 171             Sarah, 39, 41–42, 54–55, 73, 79, 103, 187,
Phelps, Louise Wetherbee, 147, 157, 166          208, 214, 243–44
Phoebe, 38–39, 41, 63–64, 95, 98–99, 105,     Schein, Edgar H., 25, 224
   187, 206, 219, 242                         Selber, Stuart, 134
                                                                                 INDEX    259

self, as constructed through discourses. See     workplace: high-value, x, 5, 108, 115–19,
    discursive constructions, of the “self”         125, 130, 134, 152, 170; high-volume,
self-documentation, 74, 103–4, 121. See             ix, 108; and literacy demands, 45–46;
    also journals                                   managers, 141
Selfe, Cynthia L., 136, 171                      workplace cultures: and alliances, 183; and
Selfe, Cynthia L., and Richard J. Selfe Jr.,        cognitive mapping, 71–72; and “contin-
    124, 167, 173                                   uous quality improvement,” 85; coun-
Silverman, David, and Brian Torode, 123             terproductivity in, 93; and disciplining,
Slack, Jennifer Daryl, 69, 70, 143–44               103; discursive features, 91–108; and
Smith-Bermiss, Michelle, 126                        gender lines, 96; and heterosexism, 101;
social constructionist theory, x, 8, 89             organizational divisions, 96; organiza-
Society for Technical Communication, 33, 115        tional features, 69–90; organizational
Spellmeyer, Kurt, 15, 16, 20, 181                   goals, 86–88; organizational memory,
Starla, 38–39, 55, 69–70, 76, 79, 88, 95,           79; and racism, 93, 101; and sexism, 93,
    135, 156, 175, 187, 208, 214, 244               101, 103; stabilization and change, 84–
subject formation: and autoethnographic sub-        86, 89; subcultural dynamics, 81–84, 89
    ject positions, 50–52, 66; and discourses,   workshops, 121–22, 125
    10, 91–108; and relationality, 121–27        World Bank, 57
subjectivity: as articulated to ideologies,      World Wide Web, 55, 58, 59, 87–88, 95–98,
    123–24; economic, 127; ideological,             135, 146, 170
    124–27, 136; panopticon, 81, 129; po-        writers: and affect, 31, 39, 104, 112, 121–
    litical, 16, 122–24, 136; as positioned in      22; as arbitrators, 147; and “block,”
    interpretation, 50–52, 66, 93; psycho-          122; in Bureau of Labor statistics, 32,
    logical, 16, 17, 121–22, 136; and semi-         44; and collaboration (see collabora-
    otic constructions, 16, 125; as shaped by       tion); and cultural histories and tradi-
    state and surrogate institutions, 17; and       tions, 130–32; as end-user advocates,
    sites, 66–67; sociological, 121–22; stu-        59, 175; and expertise, 5, 108, 140, 149–
    dent, 4, 21, 145; technological, 167;           58, 162; as functionaries, 75–76; and
    theories of, x, 16                              knowledge and behavior, 105–6; as liai-
Sue, 39–40, 58, 73, 79–80, 101, 103–5,              sons to exterior, 76–77; as lookouts,
    187, 208, 216, 244                              175; as mediators, 107; as “mediums,”
Sullivan, Patricia, 11, 22, 32–33, 118, 147         39; as negotiators, 147; as nodes, 135,
symbolic analysts, 115–22, 132, 134–35              157; as an “occupational community,”
                                                    33; and organizational studies, 128–30;
Taylor, Frederick W., 4                             as a professional class, 88, 111–13, 125,
Taylorization: and time-motion studies, 4;          126, 145, 179; profiles of, 134–46; psy-
   and work organization, 4, 5, 12, 44,             chology of, 102–5; as robots, 143–62;
   116, 131, 136, 164                               roles of, 76–78, 88; skills of, 72–74, 89,
Tess, 38–39, 41–42, 55, 57, 82–83, 99, 105,         106; status of, 74–76, 106–7, 140, 162;
   187, 208, 214, 244                               and systems thinking, 129; and turnover,
Tom, 37, 39, 63–64, 95–96, 187, 209, 220,           55, 57; and ways of knowing, 83
   245                                           writing: and autodidacticism, 38; in busi-
Tufte, Edward R., 10                                nesses and corporations, 54–57, 211–14;
                                                    and career change, 42; collaborative (see
usability, 11, 71                                   composition, collaborative); computer-
                                                    mediated, 134–36; and creative/critical
value added, 115                                    binary, 179; and deadlines, 41, 79; dif-
virtual forums, 124–25, 169–71                      ficulty of, 39; and diplomacy, 42; and
voice, 123, 158                                     document design, 73, 145; in educa-
                                                    tional and nonprofit institutions, 62–64,
WAC (writing across the curriculum), 140,           218–20; as eliciting emotions, 40, 43; as
  147                                               encounter with the world, 39; as engage-
260    INDEX

writing, (continued)                                resenting the organization, 135; review
   ment, 39; as exposing oneself, 39; ghost-        processes, 58, 65; and schooling, 38–39;
   writing, 58–59; in government agencies           and skills development, 37; socialization
   and institutions, 57–60, 214–16; and             into, 85; solicitations and acknowledg-
   hypertext composing, 130; impersonal,            ments, 95–96; speeches, 79; and talent,
   4; kinds of, 94–97; as learned, 36–41; as        37; and teaching, 42, 54, 63; teams, 65,
   linked to feelings, 39; as literary author-      76–78, 81, 83, 152, 159, 169 (see also
   ship, 39; as a livelihood, 40; as a mode         composition, collaborative); and tech-
   of learning, 6, 107; as organizational           nology studies, 131; and utilitarian ends,
   product, 97–98; and other people’s meta-         42; and value, x, 115–17
   phors, 73; and other people’s texts, 41;
   as personal, 40; and power, x, 117–19;        Yocom, Margaret “Peggy,” 66, 91
   in professional associations and socie-
   ties, 60–62, 216–18; and project man-         Zebroski, James, and Nancy Mack, 166–67
   agement, 41; and publication, 39; as rep-     Zuboff, Shoshana, 6, 12, 134, 170
Jim Henry holds degrees from Princeton University, the Université de
Genève, the Institut Universitaire d’Etudes du Développement, Webster
University in Geneva, and the University of Pennsylvania. He is an
associate professor of English at George Mason University, where he
develops curricula for the MA program in professional writing and
editing. His essays have appeared in College English and in numerous
professional writing journals.