PART I


Your Move


Care of the cow brings good fortune.

—The I Ching





1.


Daily Writing


Practice is something done under all circumstances, whether you’re happy or sad. You don’t become tossed away by a high weekend or a blue Monday. It is something close to you, not dependent on high-tech gyrations or smooth workshop leader talk. Writing is something you do quietly, regularly, and in doing it, you face your life.

—Natalie Goldberg

Writing every day is the key to becoming a writer. Writing every day is the key to remaining a writer. It is the only secret, the only trick. Don’t despise the fifteen-minute write. Don’t despise writing in your journal. Don’t despise writing down your complaints for fifteen minutes before going to work. Any writing counts.

Keep a timed-writing (or writing-practice) notebook. In it, write for fifteen minutes every day. Of course on some days you will write for longer than fifteen minutes. But—and this is important—a long session one day does not apply to the next. The day after a long session, sit down once again to your fifteen minutes. Decide the night before when those fifteen minutes will be. The next day, when the time arrives, say at four o’clock in the afternoon during your coffee break, stop whatever you are doing and write. This advice does not originate with me—I got it from Dorothea Brande’s Becoming a Writer. Ever since I read that inspiring book some thirty-five years ago, I have written every day (excepting one or two migrainous days per year). I write early in the morning, in the silence of dawn, soon after pouring that indispensable mug of strong hot coffee.

Write without stopping. Do not be concerned about being good, interesting, or correct. Writing is a discovery tool that belongs to you. If you can’t think of the next thing to say, write your hesitations, write “okay, let’s see, what else, well, maybe . . .” Do not lift your pen into the air. (What would happen to a bird in flight if it stopped flapping its wings?) Do not rush, do not stop. Write continuously for fifteen minutes. You can continue if you want, or you can stop. It is not better to continue. It is not better to stop.

Writing in your notebook for fifteen minutes a day is a practice that continues no matter what article or book you are working on, no matter where you are with that poem or novel. In other words, the timed writing in the notebook is not superseded by work undergoing revision on the computer.

Writing practice in your notebook underlies all your other writing. It keeps you connected to your writing no matter what else is going on in your life. It keeps you connected to the external world and to your interior life. It provides you with a resource base, ever expanding, out of which you produce finished pieces.

It keeps you generating new writing. It forever eliminates the sporadic work habit. It recognizes that generating new work is qualitatively different from rewriting, and that both need consistent attention. The fifteen-minute write makes the difference between being a writer and wishing to be a writer. It makes the difference between being an author who no longer writes and a writer who may also be an author but who still takes up the pen every day, for better or for worse. Writing practice moots the concept “writer’s block.”

I have found that fifteen minutes is not a token span of time. I once had a client who wrote for two hours every day for about five years. She was really making progress! But then she underwent a major, exciting career change and took on massive new professional responsibilities. There was no way she could get to her two hours. Sadly, she stopped writing for a decade. Fifteen minutes is obtainable. It’s obtainable whether you are a physician with a grueling schedule or a working mom with three toddlers (or both).

The fifteen minutes is not token, I’ve found, because it keeps you connected to what you are working on, no matter what your current circumstances. In a busy life, a week and then two weeks can go by in no time at all, with little or no writing done. The practice of writing for fifteen minutes per day simply deletes this problem.

Why a notebook? Why not a computer or your device? I argue that we writers should keep on using or begin to use a nonelectronic notebook, that quaint old thing with pages sewn together that asks to be written in by hand. We should keep using our computers and devices of course. But we should also carry a notebook.

A notebook is quiet. It does not ding or ping. It does not deliver texts. It does not serve as a phone, calendar, clock, weather forecaster, or means to chat. It does not enable you to interrupt yourself to look up something on the internet, leading to something else, leading to . . . we all know how that goes. It does not provide access to social media. Writing in a notebook, we are with our own thoughts, our own words, our own observations, our own spellings, our own hesitations, our own ways of saying things. Time in the notebook is quiet time, time with our own plans, dreams, thoughts, lists of plants or types of dogs seen on the walk today. A notebook has no spellcheck. It cannot reformat. It cannot be lost in the cloud (it can be lost on a bus). And later you can sit quietly and turn its pages (different from scrolling) and underline interesting ideas or observations for later use. A notebook allows for a different type of thought process. And shaping letters, writing words by hand, actually activates more parts of the brain than does tapping a key, according to the latest neuroscientific findings.*

Mind you, I am quite wired. I have bonded with my laptop. Even though I write daily in a notebook, I have some eight thousand Word files containing my writing, all on my laptop. I also carry and use a device. I am subject to the dings, the texts, the urge to look it up. I know the territory.

But I also savor the daily connection of hand to page, body to page, breath to page that comes from writing by hand. Norman Mailer said, “It’s hard to explain how agreeable it is to do one’s writing in longhand. You feel that all of your body and some of your spirit has come down to your fingertips.”* A quick internet search brings up numbers of writers who compose by hand—Joyce Carol Oates, John Irving, Andre Dubus III, to mention three. The brilliant Lauren Groff composes the first ten to twelve drafts of a novel by hand.† So, despite the electronics revolution, we writers, many of us, still compose by hand. And not just the old, the Luddite, the clueless.

I encourage you to purchase a notebook, a nice notebook, not too heavy, one that opens flat and has pages you like. Then you must purchase the perfect pen. Now you are all set to write in that notebook every day.

The writing done in writing practice can be about anything. It can be a journal-write (here I differ with one of the originators, Natalie Goldberg). It can be an observation exercise. It can be work on an essay, story, article, or scene. It can be used to conceptualize new work. (“The story I want to write next is . . .” Set your timer and write.)

Often I hear, “I’m sick of moaning and complaining in my journal.” There is no need to moan and complain (I enjoy doing so once in a while) and there is no need “to journal” at all if you are sick of it. Writing in your journal can involve describing what is in front of you. Describe the gooseneck lamp, the pile of books, the turned mahogany- wood mug bristling with pens. Do a recapitulation in which you detail the previous day from beginning to end (an exercise from Ira Progoff’s The Journal Workshop). Or set the timer, begin a short essay, and write it straight to the end for a fast first draft. Or write for fifteen minutes a single unpunctuated sentence that begins, “What I want to do with my life is . . .” That’s what Buckminster Fuller did before going on to become Buckminster Fuller.

There are ways to shape your writing practice so that it better serves your own goals.

•In your notebook, begin each practice session on a new page. (Do not run the sessions into one another.) Date each session and when you’re finished, if obvious, give the writing a descriptive title or label (Thoughts on Cloning, Remembering Susanne). These labels become clarifying when you are looking back through your notebooks for themes, concerns, bits of writing.

•If you are working on a story, essay, review, or other piece in your writing-practice notebook, type what you’ve written as soon as you can, the same day if possible. Soon after you’ve handwritten a scene, type that scene. Then draw a line through the handwritten version. You can still read it but you know it’s typed—superseded.

•Observation exercises should be part of every writer’s practice. Every time you go to a new city or a new country, do the Observing the Here and Now exercise (see page 38). Spend fifteen minutes describing your teenager. If you are a teenager, spend fifteen minutes describing your parent. Go to a coffeehouse and do the Observing Gesture exercise (see page 49), an exercise that trains you to observe and describe body language.

•Plan. Conceptualize new work. Organize your day. Where would you like to be as a writer a year from now? What pieces or chapters do you plan to complete this month?

•Join or start a writing-practice group, which is entirely different from a critique group.

The Writing-Practice Group. Every Tuesday and Friday at Seattle’s Wayward Coffeehouse at 65th and Roosevelt, at 2:00 p.m. or a bit after, the writers gather. Everyone is welcome. (We buy coffee, or have lunch beforehand. We want this establishment to stay in business.) Seattle authors and master-teachers Jack Remick and Robert J. Ray, friends of Natalie Goldberg, established this writing practice (at a different coffeehouse) nearly thirty years ago.

Each arriving writer writes a start line on a piece of paper and puts it on the table. For example: “Her lips were blue” or “He slammed the door” or “I lied.” At 2:30 sharp the writers begin writing, all using the same start line. (You soon discover that you can quickly go from any start line to any piece you want to work on.) When the timer goes off, each writer reads, in turn. There are no comments and there is no feedback—different from a critique group. After the writers read exactly what they have written, in all its roughness, the timer is reset and the writers resume writing. There are several cycles of this, and then everyone goes home or back to work.

Writing-practice groups vary start lines and vary the segments of writing time. One way is to write for five minutes, ten minutes, twenty minutes, and then five minutes. In another way, the writers begin, “Today I am writing about . . .” and proceed. Everyone writes for forty-five minutes. To make the reading time manageable, this group might split into two reading groups.

You can do writing practice with one or two buddies. One of my writing buddies and I used to meet at a café to write. We alternated making up assignments for ourselves. One time we decided to describe for one hour without stopping a philodendron that sat between us. We did so, and we were astonished at how much there was to see in this common household plant.

The above-mentioned Jack Remick and Robert J. Ray have written several entire books during writing practice, scene by scene, chapter by chapter. After writing practice they go home and type up what they have written, and work on it further. I think I should repeat that. After writing practice they go home and type up what they have written because they are using writing practice to produce completed, polished, and ultimately published work.

Use your writing-practice group to further your own purposes. Don’t write passively, don’t write to please others at the table. Write to play or explore when that’s what you want to do. Other times, work on your story, novel, essay, or review. Then go home and type.





Hands On: Jump Starting an Essay or Story


Do this exercise today. Do not put it off. Do it to give yourself the next thing to work on as you are working through the rest of The Writer’s Portable Mentor. This exercise will plunge you into the work of writing a piece. No more chewing on the pencil. No more staring at the page or the computer screen. In the space of an hour, the exercise generates a rough draft, gives you something first to type and then to work on. In this exercise you set the timer and write through your hesitations. Do this by yourself or do it with a writing buddy or in a writing-practice group. Write continuously without stopping. If you become stuck, write, “I am stuck” or write out your hesitations: “Let’s see, what else do I want to say, perhaps . . .” Don’t stop writing and don’t worry about being correct or neat or about whether or not it’s going to be any good. Just write without pausing or lifting your pen from the page.

1. Five minutes—I want to write an essay (story) on . . . (In this write, spin out a number of ideas.)

2. Five minutes—The essay that attracts me most right now is . . .

3. Ten minutes—List ten items, in no particular order, that I certainly would want to cover in this essay. Note that this one is not precisely a writing practice because you are making a list, and you can pause.

4. Five minutes—Take the most interesting thing on the list and write on it for five minutes. Then take another item and write on it for five minutes. Then another.

5. Five minutes—Does this piece have a central dramatic conflict? If so, what is it? Who is the antagonist? What is at stake?

6. Five minutes—If the piece has a dramatic conflict, write a trial opening paragraph that contains this conflict.

7. Five minutes—How is the conflict resolved?

8. Five minutes—What does the main person in question (protagonist if it’s a story, the “I” if memoir) do to resolve the conflict?

9. Ten minutes—What important questions emerge from this subject matter? (If this is fiction, what are the character’s questions? What are your questions about the character?)

10. Now go home and type up these “writes.” Leave a good amount of space between each paragraph—put them in chronological order if you want—but at this point you have not necessarily discovered an order.

This exercise will give you a draft of a story or essay to work on. In the space of an hour or two you will be much further along than you would be by chewing on your fingernails for that same amount of time. You’re on your way!



*For starters, see Maria Konnikova, “What’s Lost as Handwriting Fades,” New York Times, June 3, 2014, D-1; May, “A Learning Secret.”

*Mailer, “Generations,” 5.

†Charlie Rose interview with Lauren Groff, January 20, 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=90t3Q03t03g.





2.


Working with Language


And so in the last light, at the end of the day, what matters is language.

—Eavan Boland

It is remarkable how many virtuoso prose writers are also poets. I am thinking of Mary Oliver, Anne Carson, Seamus Heaney, Amit Majmudar, Eavan Boland, John Haines, Maya Angelou, John Updike, Anne Michaels, Thomas Lynch, et al. These poets collect words the way some numismatists collect coins. They work sounds constantly and consciously. The music in their prose functions as a magnet to draw readers into their thoughts, memories, reflections, reports. The music vibrates in the lines but it’s not rock music; it’s a subtext, a whisper that runs along under the text, inaudible to readers with no need to concern themselves with the technical aspects of writing they love.

This chapter is about how to get nearer to language. It is about how to vastly increase your resource base in the language, and how to play words like music.





GATHERING WORDS


I have known writers who have worked hard for years doing pretty good work. They may aspire to art, but the writing never comes close to the most brilliant writing being done today. All that hard work should give more back to the writer, yet the quality of writing remains merely competent.

Often this hard-working writer is approaching language passively, different from the way Barry Lopez or Arundhati Roy or Ben Okri approaches language. This writer is using only words that come to mind, or words he grew up with, or words she stumbles upon while reading the New York Times. Naturally this writer looks up the occasional unfamiliar word in a dictionary, as any educated person would do. But he strives for expression with rather general, conventional diction that has little to offer in the way of echo, color, or texture. Unlike J. A. Baker:

The northern slope is open woodland, rusty with winter bracken, silvered with birches, green with mossy oak.

(J. A. Baker, The Peregrine, 79)

Nothing fancy here, but Baker’s concrete language and his use of color make the sentence glow.

The writers of deep and beautiful works spend real time gathering words. They learn the names of weeds and tools and types of roof. They work to overcome plant blindness—the tendency to see plants as green background instead of as individual organisms, each with a name. They make lists of color words (ruby, scarlet, cranberry, brick). They savor not only the meanings, but also the musicality of words. They are hunting neither big words nor pompous words nor latinate words but mainly words they like. They are not “improving their vocabulary” or studying for the SAT or the GRE. They are not trying to be fancy or decorative. This is a different kind of thing. Annie Proulx:

I use an old Webster’s unabridged. I do collect dictionaries, and I do read them, and I do keep word lists, and I do make notes of language. I have big notebooks, page after page of words that I like or find interesting or crackly, or whatever. And from time to time I will also, if I feel a section is a bit limp, take a couple of days and just do dictionary work and recast the sentences so that they have more power because their words aren’t overused. Often the search for the right word can consume a lot of time, but usually it can be found.*

First-rate writers get an enormous amount of capital out of putting accurate names on things. Take a glimpse of the third-floor walk-up where Leo, a character in a Don DeLillo story, lives with his ex-wife:

There was the long metal bar of the old police lock set into its floor niche inches from the front door. There was the tall narrow radiator, a relic, unscreened, with a pan set beneath the shutoff valve to collect the drip. At times he stared into the columns of the radiator, thinking whatever he was thinking, none of it reducible to words.

There was the cramped bathroom they shared, where his broad bottom could barely wedge itself between the tub and the wall and onto the toilet seat.

(Don DeLillo, “The Starveling,” 189)

DeLillo’s language gets its freshness from its accuracy. I like long metal bar of the old police lock and floor niche and radiator and pan and shutoff valve. Not to mention Leo’s broad bottom . . .

Here, Arundhati Roy, in her first novel, portrays the grandmother. She is sitting in the old house on the hill, at the dining table, rubbing a cucumber:

She was wearing a limp, checked seersucker nightgown with puffed sleeves and yellow turmeric stains. Under the table she swung her tiny, manicured feet, like a small child on a high chair. They were puffy with edema, like little foot-shaped air cushions.

(Arundhati Roy, The God of Small Things, 21)

Roy specifies seersucker, puffed sleeves, yellow turmeric stains. The tiny swollen feet, which, it turns out, the grandmother is quite proud of.

Open any anthology of excellent stories or essays. How many town names, street names, restaurant names, dog names, actual prices, actual dates, proper names of person or place do you see? Yet these pieces eschew writing that is merely decorative. They are vibrant with nouns and verbs:

The first time I saw her she was walking on Sunset between the XXX Movie Theater and the Saigon Restaurant.

(Dagoberto Gilb, “Brisa,” 103)





DICTION PRIMER


Concrete words are words that can be perceived through a sense organ: eyes, nose, skin, tongue, ears. You can always specify which sense organ has perceived a concrete word (yellow: eyes; rotten eggs: nose). Proper names are concrete. A proper name can turn general words like street or river into specific concrete words: Everett Avenue; the Nooksack River. Because you are perceiving through one of your sense organs, what you are perceiving is typically one thing. You can’t see “rivers.” You can see the Duwamish River. You can see the Snake and Columbia rivers at their confluence. You can’t see “cities” but you can see Chicago.

Abstract words like love or inscrutable or freedom cannot be perceived through a sense organ.

There are, it seems to me, degrees of concretion. Thus yellow is concrete (you perceive it through your eyes). But mustard-yellow or yellow ocher are more concrete (the words make a closer match to the actual color).

To put a person or place on the page, we amass concrete words that pertain to that person or that place. Here is Jonathan Raban, writing (by pure linguistic coincidence) about Concrete, Washington, a small industrial town north of Seattle. Raban is writing in 1995 in the ecologically aroused Pacific Northwest. Concrete returns him to the 1970s:

Concrete people were still smokers. In the bars, drifts of pungent violet fog threw the pool players into soft focus. The Saturday-night crowd of broad-beamed folk put one in mind of corn dogs, Jo-Jos, and tubs of chocolate-chip-cookie- dough ice cream. The bars were monuments to local sport and industry. Their walls were hung with rusty two-man saws, with mirrors advertising the Winchester Repeating Arms Company alongside Michelob and Budweiser, with antlers, stags’ heads, and the pinned-out skins of wildcats. No bar in Concrete was properly a bar without a stuffed lynx or bobcat, its back arched, its right-hand foreclaws raised against the viewer, its jaws wide open for the kill.

(Jonathan Raban, “Last Call of the Wild,” 209)

Less skilled writers tend to use many more abstract, general words like gentle or abuse than do first-rate writers. But concrete details put in for their own sake can be distracting. Sometimes a character can simply get in a car and drive away; to learn that the car is a red Honda Civic coupe may do nothing to further the story. Some writers—I think of the poet Mark Strand—use car and tree to great effect.

Think of a detail as an index to something else—a situation, a character trait, an era. A man’s mismatched socks may index his lifestyle (up early to do the milking, nobody here but the cows). A town’s boarded-up Main Street—hard times. A sweetgum tree’s red and orange leaves—autumn.

How much language to use is the writer’s choice, always. But to use a limited vocabulary because in reality you only command a limited vocabulary produces a result entirely different from what you might produce in a spare style spun out of an ample and evergrowing word list.





WHERE TO FIND GOOD WORDS


No writer should be without a Very Large dictionary. Would you hire a carpenter to build you a house who had for tools a single pair of pliers? Would you begin a cross-country road trip with one gallon of gas in the tank? No you wouldn’t, but many writers go for years with nothing more in hand than their little college dictionary.

Hint for the true fanatic: The very largest Very Large dictionary, and the most delicious, is Webster’s New International Dictionary, Second Edition, Unabridged, with a 1934 copyright. Note that it’s the second edition we want. (The sensible, cost-conscious, and ever so reasonable editors of the third edition dumped one hundred thousand words.)

The 1934, second edition of this dictionary has six hundred thousand words. It has words like croodle, which is mildly obsolete but which feels comfortable with cradle or crook and which can be brought back into use. This dictionary even has extra words on the bottom of each page, and numerous words come with elaborate illustrations (a wooden sailing ship, with every rope, spar, and crossbeam named). It can be had for a fairly large chunk of change on the used-book market. (Some time in 2005 I bought mine for $60, a steal. I bought another as a wedding gift for two dear writer friends for $125.)

As you know, The Oxford Dictionary of the English Language is also an indispensable resource. This dictionary traces a word back to when it first entered English (a Germanic language that came into existence in the centuries after Germanic tribes, including Angles, invaded England in the fifth century and suppressed the Celt-speaking Britons). The dictionary gives instances of a word’s use from its earliest appearance to the present. The verb to write for example can be found in an old English sentence of the year 835: “This mid episcopus rodetacne [ic] festnie & write.” Many university and public libraries subscribe to The Oxford Dictionary of the English Language. The Seattle Public Library, for example, provides it online to anyone who has a (free) library card.

At least one ample, argumentative grammar-and-usage book is a necessity, since most dictionaries describe but do not prescribe. Usage manuals prescribe. They fight to retain the difference between insure and ensure, between that and which, between alumnae and alumni. They insist and recapitulate that and and but are excellent ways to begin a sentence, favored by first-rate writers the world over, approved and even advocated by even the most conservative grammarians. The original Fowler’s (A Dictionary of Modern English Usage by H. W. Fowler) is an entertaining and enlightening read. For a contemporary work, I would not be without my Garner’s Modern American Usage by Bryan A. Garner. It is also essential to have a grammar book. One I like is The Deluxe Transitive Vampire by Karen Elizabeth Gordon.

What guidebooks are to the world traveler, dictionaries, grammars, and usage manuals are to the writer. But gathering words should take you beyond these reference works to other compendiums of words. Clothing catalogs name clothes (chinos, cords, boot-cut jeans). Tool catalogs—try leevalley.com—name tools (ripsaw, bucksaw, coping saw, band saw). Go to an art store for types of brushes and names of pigments (bone black, burnt umber). Go to the United States Geological Survey for geographical features (shrub-steppe, bog, slough) and for spooky proper names such as the Great Dismal Swamp. You get the idea.





THE LEXICON PRACTICE


For most virtuoso writers, collecting words is a definite, specific, regular habit. Leonardo da Vinci ended up with more than nine thousand words in his lexicon.* James Joyce gathered words and phrases in a fat notebook: after he used one in the book he was writing—Ulysses—he would cross it out.† Mary Oliver ventures outdoors with pen and pad, ready to record any bug or old bone. If such writers do their lexicon work, so also should we.

What I call the Lexicon Practice is the specific process by which you put actual time—regular time—into collecting words and phrases. There are two parts to the practice. One is to make your own Lexicon (word book) and the other is to collect words and phrases in a list that pertains to the piece you are currently working on. I call this second part the word trap, because trapping words is like trapping fish in a net. The words are out there. Time to bring them in.

I have been teaching these practices for two decades and what impresses me is how I can, years later, read the writing of a former student and tell whether or not she is doing the Lexicon Practice. I can tell by her writing. Writers who do the Lexicon Practice have left in the dust what I call “conventional received diction.” Writers who don’t do it in one way or another are pretty much stuck with television words, newspaper words, cereal-box words.

Conventional received diction is the language of belief rather than the language of recorded sensory experience. For example, to speak of “buying a home” rather than “buying a house” or better, “buying a California bungalow” is to speak in the conventional diction of the real-estate business. This term is based not on sense perception but on an agenda: if we long for a home then we will be more likely to “buy a home” than to “buy a house.” To speak of hair color as blonde (or blond) is often to wander into the beige-curtained suburb of convention and stereotype rather than to put a specific person’s head of hair on the page:

Into the bay window came a woman. Stout, bleary-eyed, elderly, though her hair was dyed a squid-ink black.

(Lauren Groff, Fates and Furies, 322)

I discovered my own form of Lexicon Practice in the following way. For twelve years during the 1970s and early 1980s, I worked as a printer in Boston. During those years I began getting up at 4 or 5 a.m. to write before leaving for work at 7. My thermos of hot strong coffee was at the ready. I would sit to write in my nightgown and robe; my big old black-and-white cat, Frisky, would jump into my lap and curl up and watch my moving pen with intense interest, occasionally batting it with his paw. My then-husband, Peter Irons, would be fast asleep in the next room. A carpenter friend had made me a simple, built-in, L-shaped desk with a black-Formica handwriting surface and, to my right, when I swiveled the chair, a place for my IBM Selectric typewriter. I will never forget the pleasure of those silent mornings of writing.

At the time I had written nothing about my childhood growing up on a dairy farm on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. That part of who I was was put away: perhaps I was not ready to face the traumas of childhood. In any case my friends, pals, coworkers, comrades, and various buddies had all emerged from radically different backgrounds. Childhood was for me a distant country. But for unknown reasons, words began coming to me, and I began entering them into a black-and-white composition notebook. I titled my notebook Memories of Underdevelopment after the great Cuban film of that name. During a season of winter mornings I filled the notebook with the language of my childhood, words with no currency whatever in my postchildhood life—greenbriar, dirt road, Neil Lindsey’s pig, 4-H Club, teats, stanchions, silage, milkers, mastitis, calf barn, gutter, manure pile, manure spreader, marsh grass, muck, eels, eel trap, watermen, field hands, tizzylish cake . . . What amazed me was how the words themselves held that time and that place. I went on to remember small stories, which became “Snapshots: The Eastern Shore of Maryland,” which ultimately appeared in North Dakota Quarterly. That first lexicon was for me a turning point as a writer.

And the point is that every childhood has a lexicon. Place names, certain trees and buildings, the toys of 1934 versus the toys of 1964 versus the toys of 1984, they all make vivid a particular place, a particular era, a particular person, a particular experience. It is astonishing how much language itself holds, with no meanings added by the writer, no interpretations, no sentences, no writing.





Hands On: Make Your Own Lexicon


Buy a small bound and sewn blank book, with fine paper. This is your Lexicon.

Put in words you like, words that strike your fancy, words you want to own. I suggest giving each word half a page. Put in the word—lickspittle—and draw a horizontal line dividing the page in half. This way you can put in a word and look it up later. (Under lickspittle write: a contemptible, fawning person; a flatterer or toady.) You will end up with two words per page.

This is not a typical vocabulary list full of horrible latinate words you don’t know and don’t want to know.

The rule is, put in only the good words, the juicy words, the hot words. From time to time, savor this book. Look up words you’ve put in (something from your reading) and haven’t looked up yet. Be sure to investigate the root. Put in familiar words along with new words. Play with sounds, right in your Lexicon: kitchen matches, cord/weird/word, fired/turd.

From time to time read a big dictionary hunting for a new word, a good word, any word that strikes your fancy: galoot.

On some pages make word lists. Fiddle parts—peg box, button, side rib, bridge. Words for blue—cobalt, woad, sapphire, smalt. Words from an art exhibition you especially loved—bone, tin plate; cotton, cord, silk ribbon, silver, galloon; coconuts, shells, ostrich eggs (from Moscow Treasures).

Put down things you don’t know the names of. Do you know the parts of a window? (Muntin? Sash? Top rail?) Do you know the parts of a rocking chair? Draw or describe the thing in your Lexicon and then set about looking (in a book on house repairs or on furniture) for splat or spindle or stile. Do not order your list in any way. If you try to order it alphabetically, you will have nowhere to put words that sound good together and you will have nowhere to draw an object—a tool or roof or chair—that you will later put a name to. Do you know the names of the weeds in your garden? Look in Alexander C. Martin’s Golden Guide to Weeds. Identify the ones you see—spatterdock, chickweed, pokeweed. Write them in your Lexicon.

Do nothing more. Do not try to force the words into your writing. Just work on the Lexicon on a regular basis, as a form of play. It is remarkable how the words you put in your own Lexicon have a way of creeping into your writing.

Your Lexicon becomes part of the resource base you create for yourself as a writer. We writers accumulate large vocabularies that are constantly expanding. We take pleasure in learning the names for things. The Lexicon holds new words and words that please you. It forever ends the in-one-ear-out-the-other problem as it pertains to putting a name on a thing.

The Lexicon is a blank book with a pleasing feel, a permanent little book that you keep beside your dictionaries. Eventually you will accumulate several Lexicons. It’s fun to play with them, of an evening, to look up a word, to list the kinds of stones or guns or stars or brooms.





Hands On: Make a Word Trap


The second part of the Lexicon Practice is to make a word trap—a list of one hundred or more words or phrases—for every story or essay, not to mention novel, you work on. Most items on the list should be concrete words like tomato or horse manure that can be perceived by one of the senses. Begin by writing one hundred numbers on one hundred lines in your writer’s notebook. The numbers will stretch you to keep going—past thirty words, past forty-three words. We make the word trap in the notebook because it starts out being too messy for the Lexicon, and besides, we don’t necessarily want all these particular words in our Lexicon.

I work on my list before I begin a piece and during the whole time I am working on it. The list comprises language—not big words or necessarily even new words—associated with that time and place, that trade or event or person. Just making the list will help you sink deeper into the subject matter. After you’ve completed the list in the notebook, type it. Then work on it some more. Put words together that sound good. Keep naming things more and more accurately. And when you’ve finally completed the piece that this word trap pertains to, write your favorite words in your Lexicon for future reference.

For an essay called “Housekeeping” (set in my own house), I list objects in my house, for example:

dropleaf table

blender

black buckram covered journal books

lamp

Working on the list means naming things more accurately and working with sounds: I added a hyphen too, which pleases me.

Pembroke table

Osterizer blender

black buckram-bound journals

black metal gooseneck lamp

The second part of making a word trap trains your ear and gets good sounds going. Write twenty-five numbers on twenty-five lines. Each numbered item in the list will end up with two or three or four words taken from your first list. Here’s the beginning of my list for a piece I am writing called “Composition in Yellow”:

1. yellow, pall, pillowcase

2. yearning, urine, yams

3. “yellow peril,” pearls, pee

4. sulfur, turmeric, yellow toad

5. pear, peach, yellow pansy

6. Yellow Springs; Yellowstone Park, yellow brick road

7. mildew, mold, buttermilk

These items sound good together. Individual words within items have no need to connect with each other in any narrative sense. I like the way turmeric chimes with yellow toad and have no clue as to whether one or both or neither will end up in the piece. The list has no need whatever to make any sense whatever.

Can a verb be concrete? Conventionally, a concrete word is a noun and indeed the usual phrase is “concrete noun.” But I include verbs because I think that to trudge to work is more vivid and more concrete than to go to work or to walk slowly to work.

Persons have lexicons. The list alone can evoke a person with remarkable vividness. My Grandfather Henry: ice water, salted butter, Pennsylvania Dutch, “the wooden hill” (staircase) . . .

Places have lexicons. The Pacific Northwest: crow, Puget Sound, Steilacoom Tribe, western red cedar, Smith Tower, Emmett Watson’s Oyster Bar, Starbucks, Northwest jellyfish, geoduck (pronounced gooey duck), Stillaguamish River . . .

Indeed, any subject matter is rich in lexicon, if you will but go after it, hunt it down, gather it up. Here is Sue Allison on measurement:

A yard, a pace, a foot, a fathom. How beautiful the language of measurement is, and we’re not even talking iambs yet.

A fifth, a finger, a jigger, a drop, a dram, a grain, a scruple.

A scruple is twenty grains, or twenty barley cornes. It is as small as a pebble.

(Sue Allison, “Taking a Reading,” 1)

Every craft, trade, profession, or job has a lexicon. You are reading a book: books have a lexicon. Here book geek (bookseller, book sales rep, book writer, book reader) Lewis Buzbee recalls how his employers at Upstart and Crow, the bookshop of his first job, sat him down to teach him the history of the book and its parts:

First, they told me about the book itself. The right page was the recto, the left the verso. The pages of a hardcover were bound in groups called signatures; the pages of a paperback were cut flush and glued to the spine in a process called perfect-binding. Gutter, colophon, deckled; the words and terms spilled out.

(Lewis Buzbee, The Yellow-Lighted Bookshop, 49)

An interesting exercise is to take a passage that attracts you and from it make a reverse lexicon—a list of its most quirky or interesting words. This can lay bare the effects of diction (word choice) on the piece. A reverse lexicon for Buzbee’s passage would include:

book

glued



recto

spine



verso

perfect binding



hardcover

gutter



signature

colophon



flush

deckled





WORDS AS NOTES


Whenever we write, we work with sound. Every word, every sentence emits sound. The question is, is it a musical sound, whether plain or ornate, or is it the interminable drone of a washing machine?

Here is a sentence composed by William H. Gass:

Neat people are fascists of the mop and bucket, the tight sheet, the silver chest.

(William H. Gass, “Lust,” 291)

How neat that neat and sheet are perfect rhymes and that people picks up that long e sound. And listen to the assonance (echoing vowel sounds) of mop and bucket, and the swishing of fascist and chest. Finally, we take in the tintinnabulation of terminal t’s in neat, bucket, tight, sheet, and chest. Such a short sentence. Such a lot of sound work going on.

Working sound is about creating echoes and resonances. Resonance: intensification and prolongation of sound, especially of a musical tone, produced by sympathetic vibration.

Here’s a passage from the poet Mary Oliver:

In the lyrical poems of Robert Frost there is almost always something wrong, a dissatisfaction or distress. The poet attempts an explanation and a correction. He is not successful. But he has, often in metaphorical language, named whatever it is that disquiets him. At the same time, in the same passages, the poem is so pleasant—so very pleasant—to read or to hear.

(Mary Oliver, “A Man Named Frost,” 49)

Listen to the alliteration (same first consonant) in dissatisfaction, distress, disquiet. Listen to the chime in distress and successful, to the repeated “shun” sound in dissatisfaction, explanation, correction. Note how repeating is one more way to make an echo. For Mary Oliver, language is a musical instrument.

And for Cormac McCarthy:

They were starving right enough. The country was looted, ransacked, ravaged. Rifled of every crumb. The nights were blinding cold and casket black and the long reach of the morning had a terrible silence to it. Like a dawn before battle. The boy’s candlecolored skin was all but translucent. With his great staring eyes he’d the look of an alien.

(Cormac McCarthy, The Road, 129)

Listen to right, ransacked, ravaged, rifled. And to crumb, cold, casket, black, candlecolored, the k sound alliterating but also echoing within casket and black and candlecolored.

Here is Thomas Lynch, funeral director and poet:

The moments spent before the mirror while tending to my toilet did nothing to lessen the lessons that Time is certainly not on our side, nor does it heal more wounds than it opens. The ever-retreating hairline, the whitening of one’s beard and mustache, the bleeding gums, the basal cell carcinomas, the boils and blisters and bags under the eyes, the belly gone soft, the withering member, the hemorrhoids and hematomas, the varicosities and local edemas, the puff, the paunch, the wrecked version of one’s former self that presents itself most mornings, are enough to render most men suicidal.

(Thomas Lynch, “Sweeney Revisited,” 41–42)

Listen to the wordplay in lessen the lessons. Listen to the alliteration in tending, toilet, and Time and in bleeding, basal, blisters, bags, belly, and further in hemorrhoids and hematomas. Listen to how hematomas and edemas assonate. What a lot of sound work going on in a short passage.

Here is a simple sentence from Jean Rhys’s masterpiece novel:

The black and gilt clock on a shelf struck four.

(Jean Rhys, Wide Sargasso Sea, 125)

The sentence sticks to plain words. But clacks the k’s and trills the l’s. Its stark power derives in part from the fact that every word comprises one and only one syllable.





SOUND EFFECTS


Poets know what a slant rhyme is, and poets, at least the lyrical poets, know alliteration, assonance, the vowel scale, and various other ways to make words echo. Here are some main types of sound effects that are just as effective in prose, when used with a good ear. (See ahead for a note on how to develop that good ear.)





Slant Rhyme


Slant rhyme, also called off rhyme or imperfect rhyme or near rhyme, is not new. Emily Dickinson—who was of course way ahead of her time—used it a lot. She would put together words like violet and light or Heaven, even, given. Slant rhyme can sound more modern than perfect rhyme (white, height) and modern poets use it profusely.

Here are examples of perfect rhymes followed by a slant rhyme:

some/hum

home



cash/flash

flesh or wish



flood/blood

glad or Trinidad or mood



blue/shoe

blow, maybe shawl



dust/rust

roost



change/range

orange or hinge



word/bird

bored





Alliteration


Alliteration occurs when first consonants make the same sound and thus set up an echo. Many slogans alliterate: Power to the People. Alliterating can be overdone and sometimes, once you begin enthusiastically alliterating, it is necessary to tone it down, to revise against it. But first, do alliterate. Here’s a sentence by the novelist John Dufresne, speaking of the writer’s need to keep a notebook:

My job is to jot.

(John Dufresne, “Holdalls,” 116)





Assonance


Assonance is the echoing of vowel sounds. In Dufresne’s sentence above, job and jot alliterate but they also assonate.

Here Barry Lopez speaks of the desert:

The last thing you will notice will be the stones, small bits of volcanic ash, black glass, blue tourmaline, sapphires, narrow slabs of grey feldspar, rose quartz, sheets of mica and blood agate.

(Barry Lopez, Desert Notes; River Notes, 28)

See how the a sounds echo in ash, black, glass, sapphires, slabs, and agate (the first a). That’s assonance. Lopez also alliterates: bits, black, blue, and blood.





The Vowel Scale


Sounds have frequency.* Sound travels in waves that come at more frequent or less frequent intervals. The shorter the wave, the higher the frequency. Eek! is a high-frequency sound. The longer the wave, the lower the frequency. Blue is a low-frequency sound.

It is useful to think of the high-frequency vowels as high-energy vowels. Pie in the sky! Let’s get high! Dream on! Scream! Hey, hey! In his great villanelle, Dylan Thomas makes conscious use of vowels high on the vowel scale: “Rage, rage against the dying of the light.”

Low-frequency vowels are low-energy vowels. They bring us down. We have the blues (not the greens). We are lonely. We feel moody, we moon about, we moan and groan. We feel low.

Certain words are riveting because (I think) they combine lowest- and highest-frequency sounds and thus contain both shadow (low) and light (high): moonlight.

Here’s your primer:

Lowest Frequency

Highest Frequency



long o (boo)

long e (bee)



long o (bone)

long a (bay)



short o (book)

long i (buy)



The Scale from Low to High

boo

bone

book

aw (thought)

oi (boy)

ow (bough)

ah (bar)

bud

bird

bat

bet

bit

buy

bay

bee

We all use the vowel scale semiconsciously (it may be partly physiological), but it is a delight to begin using it consciously. If your character has the blues, try revising the diction of her thoughts to lower on the vowel scale. For an excited, high-energy feel, try making more words shriek naked in the night trees.





Hands On: Working with Sound


Begin working with sound. Try all kinds of sounds. Many poets eschew blatant perfect rhymes (slow, blow, show), but some writers can make them work. If this is your cup of tea, try putting the rhymes here and there rather than only at the end of lines. And use slant rhymes too. In prose and poetry, try all the sound effects. It will likely feel awkward at first, but gradually your ear will improve. The point is not to go fancy or to indulge in false rhapsody or fussy hyperdescription. The simplest-sounding prose can be playing words as notes.

•Develop your ear. Read, reread, and read out loud the lyrical writers, including the prose and poetry of lyrical poets. Keep in mind that poetics in our culture is vastly diverse: Some poets write against conventional lyricism and strive for an antilyrical voice. Other poets use engines other than sound to drive their poems. Besides which, there’s such a thing as a “prosy” poem with diction dull and gray. This is a common fault of unrealized poems but it may be a technique of some writers. Whatever the case, reading them only deadens your ear. To train your ear, read the lyric poets. Gerard Manley Hopkins is a must. Try William Butler Yeats and John Haines. Try Muriel Rukeyser. Try Theodore Roethke, Kenneth Rexroth, and Gwendolyn Brooks. Lyric poets all.

•Develop a keen awareness of word roots, and include them in your Lexicon. You can chime and ding Old English words—wood, God, bed, clock, work—much easier than latinate words—approximately, judicious, interim, attention. But there are no absolute rules. Use latinate words whenever you want to, but do so with cognizance and consciousness.

•Learn the rudiments of sound effects in language. A short list would include the vowel scale, slant rhyme, assonance, alliteration, sibilance (the s sound), and repetition. Music is related to echo. No need to master the names of the sounds that echo in thick and smoke, but find them and use them.

•Sentences that have lists in them are a prime place to work sound. Consider this one composed by Ben Okri. Note how weird, wounded, and wonderful alliterate and how d sounds echo:

The bar saw its most unusual congregation of the weird, the drunk, the mad, the wounded, and the wonderful.

(Ben Okri, The Famished Road, 89)

•Take something you are working on, that you have on your computer. Take one of your paragraphs and write it by hand back into your writing-practice notebook. Consider it a “before” paragraph. Now work it to hone sound (and accuracy). Then type the changes back into the piece itself. Keep on doing this, paragraph by paragraph. Here is a paragraph I worked about the German Expressionist artist Gabriele Münter.

Before

A forceful and original artist, Münter was socially insecure, and in her relationship with Kandinsky, lived outside what would have been her preferred (and more protected) way of life within a marriage.

After

Gabriele Münter was a forceful and original artist, but socially diffident and emotionally dependent on Kandinsky. She was too Bohemian or too conventional or too timid to tell him outright that she longed to marry him.

Much better, or so it seems to me.

•Take a paragraph that holds a lot of emotion. Make that a “before” paragraph. Then work on an “after” paragraph that pushes the words lower in the vowel scale (for a sad scene) or higher in the vowel scale (for a tense or exciting scene).





REPETITION


Good writers delight in repeating good words. Poor writers, timid writers, average writers, many teachers including writing teachers, and some editors despise a repeated word. Their philosophy is: use once and discard. To them words are like dental floss, toilet paper, chewing gum.

To first-rate writers, a good word is a note to be chimed. Begin looking for repetition in your reading; you will see it everywhere:

The house smelled of old beer, old grease, old smoke.

(Daniel Woodrell, Winter’s Bone, 53)

She was a poor person, I was her poor child, and no one asks poor people if they want war.

(Viet Thanh Nguyen, The Sympathizer, 3–4)

Here’s a sentence voiced by a character who is a writer:

Anyway, work is not the word I would apply to what I do. Work is too large a term, too serious. Workers work.

(John Banville, The Sea, 30)

In this tiny passage Banville repeats work four times and bears down even harder by echoing w sounds in way, work, word, what, worker.

Now look at a passage composed by Lidia Yuknavitch:

Sienna Torres was a troublemaker young woman from a troubled household making trouble wherever she went. She broke the rules at school, she broke them at home, she broke them at Albertson’s and Nordstrom and 7-Eleven, and she broke them at swim practice.

(Lidia Yuknavitch, The Chronology of Water, 135)

Yuknavitch morphs the word trouble into three forms, trouble, troubled, and troublemaker, a rhetorical devise known as polyptoton (pronounced polyp-TOE-ton). The effect, I think, is to further convince us of how much trouble this troublesome troublemaker was. The sentence, instead of moving on, bears down. And then we break into broke: She broke . . . she broke . . . she broke . . . she broke. . . . As Sienna’s actions (breaking rules) repeat, so the word broke repeats. The sentence does more than state its meaning; it enacts its meaning.

Here Lewis Buzbee reflects on a life spent working in bookshops and reading books:

Books are slow. They require time; they are written slowly, published slowly, and read slowly.

(Lewis Buzbee, The Yellow-Lighted Bookshop, 5)

And here the novelist John Olson repeats the word escape twice and the word desire four times in a thirteen-word sentence:

You can’t escape desire: even the desire to escape desire is a desire.

(John Olson, In Advance of the Broken Justy, 85)

Anne Carson’s character is lying alone in a tent with her sleeping boyfriend and her thoughts. The relationship is in trouble. The couple is about to break up.

Drops of water from a leak in the roof of the tent are hitting my forehead one after another like items on a list. I am bad at building a fire. Bad at folding the tent. Bad at driving the truck. Bad at sticks. Bad at snakes. Bad at coffee. Bad at clothesline. Bad at knives. Bad at water fetching. Bad at unpacking. Bad at packing. Bad at shortwave radio tuning.

(Anne Carson, Plainwater, 194–95)

Rick DeMarinis’s character Jack feels overcome with pointlessness:

I felt blue. Worse than blue. Sick. I felt incurable—ridden with the pointlessness of just about everything you could name. The farm struck me as a pointless wonder and I found the idea depressing and fearsome. Pointless bugs lay waiting in the fields for the pointless crops as the pointless days and seasons ran on and on into the pointless forever.

“Shit,” I said.

(Rick DeMarinis, “Weeds,” 48)

Oliver Sacks contemplates time:

I had found myself thinking of time—time and perception, time and consciousness, time and memory, time and music, time and movement.

(Oliver Sacks, On the Move: A Life, 350)

Listen to the prologue to Jack Remick’s California novel Valley Boy:

When they came out of the dustbowl, they carried things on their backs. The things they couldn’t carry they left behind for the thieves and the looters of antiques. When they came out of the dustbowl, there was nowhere to go but west because the fruit was in the West and ranchers needed hands to pick it.

They had hands.

When they came out of the dustbowl, his mother was three years old and she had one pair of shoes and one dress and the dress was sewn from a Gold Medal flour sack.

They came out of the dustbowl into the West to get to the sea, to get to wet land, to get to the oranges, to get to peaches and pears and apricots, to get to grapes and almonds and the cotton.

(Jack Remick, Valley Boy, prologue)

Finally, Lorrie Moore:

Her nervous collapse was subtle. It took the form of trips to a small neighborhood park, for which she dressed all in white: white blouses, white skirts, white anklets, shoes flat and white as boat sails.

(Lorrie Moore, “Two Boys,” 3)





Hands On: Learning to Repeat


If you have trained yourself not to repeat, learning to do the opposite takes practice and it takes developing your ear. Hint No. 1: Three is the magic number. Repeating a word once looks like you ran out of words. Repeating it twice signals confidence and intention. Hint No. 2: Repeat a word as soon as possible after you first use it. Immediately is better than soon.

Now try this. Do a five-minute writing-practice session describing a place or person. Circle the hot words and put them in a list.

What is a hot word? Hot words zing. They hold what may be emotionally strong, emotionally hot. Use impulse and instinct to find your hot words.

Now that you have circled the hot words, choose one, and do the practice again, writing on the same subject. Write for a full ten minutes. In every line of writing, force yourself to repeat the word you have chosen.

I repeat, in every line of writing, force yourself to repeat the hot word. I did not say repeat the word in every sentence. I said repeat the word in every line. Every time you return with your hand to the left side of the page, you are obliged to repeat your hot word before you get to the end of the line. Now, at a certain point you will become desperate. Keep writing anyhow. Past the point of desperation lies inspiration.

This exercise is fascinating. In a group of ten writers we do the exercise, and then read what we’ve written. Invariably there are amazing passages that go deeper and deeper into the emotion of the situation.

Now take what you have written and compose a paragraph. Try repeating more than one word, as do many of the models presented in this chapter.

Read aloud the passage you have written. Work on it for sound. Read it aloud again, and then again, until it sounds just right.

The practice of repeating, though, requires a cautionary note. Soon after you begin, you will hit the wall of teachers, editors, and peer writers who wish to stamp out repetition. Admit that your passage may not be well-rendered—yet—and keep on working your ear. Show your peer writers passages by Lorrie Moore and other virtuoso writers and ask if they think these writers were in error. Show them this part of your Writer’s Portable Mentor.

As for teachers and editors, it depends on your relationship. Don’t fight with them. Go ahead and trade your repetitions for a grade or a paycheck. But in your other work, keep the faith and keep on perfecting your skill at repeating words.





VERB WORK


Verbs carry the action, they carry the story, they carry character, feeling, a sense of doom, a sense of hope. Question every adverb because adverbs modify verbs. Consider whether “She ate her soup noisily” could be changed to “She slurped her soup.”

The simple act of circling and questioning every verb in a passage you have written can result in radical improvements.

My colleague and I went backfiring out of Savannah at dusk in his old Buick.

(Melissa Fay Greene, “On Writing Nonfiction,” 232)

The visionary political vocabulary of three centuries has been garbaged.

(John Berger, “Wanting Now,” 7)

Aunt Sallie had lost the two loves of her life in a few short months, but she chose to peacock her grief, wearing Thai silk dresses in jewel colors, dyeing her hair blueblack.

(Lauren Groff, Fates and Furies, 220)

At least once in every piece you write, consciously make a sentence using multiple verbs:

I kicked and thrashed and screamed.

(Ben Okri, The Famished Road, 20)

The lights changed, brakes screeched, and traffic halted.

(Rosamunde Pilcher, “The Tree,” 29)

E. B. White, that master essayist, here speaks of his dog:

He never just lay and rested. Within the range of his tether, he continued to explore, dissect, botanize, conduct postmortems, excavate, experiment, expropriate, savor, masticate, regurgitate.

(E. B. White, “Bedfellows,” 83)

And finally, here is Jonathan Raban on the second day of a vacation in Bandon, Oregon, a place that overlooks the Pacific Ocean:

The next morning, the foghorn was still mooing and the sky lay on the sea in wreaths and coils of smoke.

(Jonathan Raban, “The Waves,” 185)





Hands On: Working Verbs


•Take a page of a piece you’ve written. Circle the verbs. Question each one. Change at least one verb per page.

•Circle every adverb. (Adverbs modify verbs.) Can you take out an adverb by making the verb do more work? (Change “She cut vigorously” to “She whacked.” Change “He ran fast” to “He raced” or “He sprinted.” Change “She turned around quickly” to “She spun around.”)

•In every piece, write at least one sentence with multiple verbs.



This is more than you need to know to begin working with sound.

You can begin to practice your vowel scales. You can make consonants clack and sibilants swish. You can ring words like bells, ding the hot words.

But don’t forget truth and don’t forget accuracy. That is your brake on flowery, overalliterated, hyperdecorative, false language. Don’t forget image. Eschew adjectives. Adore verbs and nouns. Keep it simple. Omit needless words.



*Upchurch, Glimmer Train Guide, 248.

*Gelb, Leonardo da Vinci, 73.

†“Ireland Buys a Trove of Joyce Notebooks,” New York Times, May 31, 2002, E5.

*I am indebted to John Frederick Nims (Western Wind, 160–61) for the insights in this section.





3.


Writing to See


Your beliefs will be the light by which you see, but they will not be what you see and they will not be a substitute for seeing.

—Flannery O’Connor

We write to bring insight to the page. We hope to be perceptive. We hope to discern the essential nature of the matter at hand. Very well. The truth is that insight begins with sight—with seeing what is there. Perception, writes Joan M. Erikson in Wisdom and the Senses, begins with sense perception.

Sense perception requires really looking, really listening, really paying attention. It requires time. Henry James famously said that a writer is one upon whom nothing is lost. But, writer or not, it’s easy to become one upon whom most everything is lost as we rush to get to work or get the kids to school on time. Our days full of duties and distractions, not to mention way too much attention paid to the small screen in our hand, tend to dull our senses. Under these circumstances, it’s a good idea to spend regular time each week training ourselves in observation. For a writer, observation becomes a habit and a way of life. And it really can’t be cranked up for special circumstances (such as the piece you happen to be working on) and then let drop.

A visual artist may attend a life class and sit and draw the figure for an hour or two hours a week. John Berger describes the drawing process this way: “For the artist, drawing is discovery. And that is not just a slick phrase, it is quite literally true. It is the actual act of drawing that forces the artist to look at the object in front of him, to dissect it in his mind’s eye and put it together again; or, if he is drawing from memory, that forces him to dredge his own mind, to discover the content of his own store of past observations.”*

The Here and Now exercise is the writer’s version of drawing.





OBSERVING THE HERE AND NOW


Go to a café. Or go to a park. Or go to a library. Or go down to the river. Write for fifteen minutes at a steady pace without stopping. (Use a timer, or write down your start time.) Describe what’s in front of you. You can describe the whole scene, or just one object.

Don’t write about anything except what you see, hear, touch, taste, or smell. Don’t write your feelings, opinions, or reflections. Write color and shape. Write sound. You might describe the damp air or the hard desk. The taste of coffee. The smell of exhaust fumes. No feelings. No opinions. No thoughts.

These writings connect you to the world, to where you are. The more you do them, the more aware you become. They are pure training in sensory observation; you can also type them and compose them into settings, poems, pieces of essays. They are concrete-word farms.

Doing this exercise, you will inevitably come across objects, gizmos, thingamajigs, doohickeys, and doodads, not to mention any number of plants, that you can’t put a name to. Write these down in your Lexicon, not the word, which you don’t know, but the thing that awaits its word. Write “the vertical center piece in the back of a straight-back chair.” In your Lexicon you can also draw the chair. The definition will be there waiting for the word splat.

Now a warning: when you first do the Here and Now exercise, and then compose it into a setting or a poem, you may have a rather adjective-laden paragraph. First do your lexicon work (make that chair into a ladder-back chair, make the table a Pembroke table). Then work at reducing adjectives and increasing concrete nouns and verbs. Make a list sentence, and make the list a list of nouns. Work to make the nouns more specific: not small house, but cottage; not roof, but mansard roof; not container, but Mason jar, flowerpot, rucksack. Work to make the verbs contain their adverbs: not slowly walk, but stroll.

You can do the Here and Now exercise from memory. Write continuously but slowly to recall every detail of a kitchen, an evening at the movies, a family meal. Here’s a scene from A Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick:

He found himself confronting an all-white room with steel fixtures and steel chairs and steel desk, all bolted down, a hospital-like room, purified and sterile and cold, with the light too bright. . . . Two deputies regarded him, both in full uniform of the Orange County Sheriff’s Office, but with medical stripes.

(Philip K. Dick, A Scanner Darkly, 108)

And here is the Sprague mansion in James Ellroy’s spooky crime novel The Black Dahlia:

The entrance foyer was as Spanish as the outside of the mansion was Tudor: tapestries and crossed wrought-iron swords on the whitewashed walls, thick Persian carpets over a polished wood floor. The foyer opened into a giant living room with a men’s club atmosphere—green leather chairs arranged around low tables and settees; huge stone fireplace; small Oriental throw rugs, multicolored, placed together at different angles, so that just the right amount of oak floor bordered them. The walls were cherrywood, and featured framed sepias of the family and their ancestors.

(James Ellroy, The Black Dahlia, 141)





Hands On: Training in Observation


•Look over the piece or pieces you are working on. Can you go to an actual setting and capture it in your notebook by setting your timer and writing it down? Do so.

•Set your timer and do a Here and Now from memory: capture every detail you can remember of a childhood kitchen, a drugstore, a street, or a classroom.

•On a regular basis, do the Here and Now exercise just to train your capacity to observe. Look and write and look again. Or write while looking.

•Try this: for thirty days in a row, do the Here and Now exercise for fifteen minutes a day in the same place. Do lexicon work each day so that gradually you can put a name on everything you are looking at. I once did this in my living room. At first it was interesting. Following that: excruciating boredom. I wrote through that and one day, like magic, I saw the room in a new way, its wood and earth colors glowing, a glint of sunlight on the maplewood rocker turning it almost white . . .





SEEING COLOR


Look up from this page. Look around you. What colors do you see? What if you were to paint the scene before your eyes, just as you see it? What pigments would you squeeze from the tube? Look at your hand. How many colors do you see? Can you put them into words?

We’ve heard the phrase “gray prose.” Gray prose is general prose, colorless prose. We could do worse than to color our prose. Some nouns—rubies, urine, blueberries—carry color onto the page without further elaboration. These concrete nouns are good because nouns are stronger than adjectives, and in becoming aware of color you don’t want to inadvertently begin proliferating adjectives. Remember the color verbs: to blacken, to yellow, to purple.

To comprehend what it could mean to become acutely cognizant of color, we can turn to Vincent van Gogh’s letters to his brother Theo. Here he writes from the coast of southern France:

The Mediterranean has the colouring of mackerel, changeable I mean. You don’t always know if it is green or violet, you can’t even say it’s blue, because the next moment the changing reflection has taken on a tinge of rose or grey.

(Vincent van Gogh, The Letters of Vincent van Gogh, 267)

Or, we can turn to that lyrical classic of the Harlem Renaissance, Cane, by Jean Toomer. Cane is more than color—it’s metaphor, music, mojo—but colors glow on every page.

Gray slanting roofs of houses are tinted lavender in the setting sun.

(Jean Toomer, Cane, 73)

Here is Leslie Marmon Silko. Does it surprise you that she is a painter as well as a writer?

The Catalina Mountains were heaped with blue rain clouds so the light of the rising sun was diffuse and luminous—a silver blue shimmered in the jade green of the jojoba and palo verde, and greasewood.

(Leslie Marmon Silko, The Turquoise Ledge, 97)

How is your color lexicon? Go to any art-supply store. Purveyors of pigments such as the firm Winsor & Newton provide sample sheets with daubs of paint painted on. These sheets name the pigments, which have over the centuries evolved stable names (burnt umber, Payne’s gray, yellow ochre), unlike the colors of house paints and printing inks, which are dyes named by advertising writers. The hue of a house paint by Pittsburgh Paints called “Twilight Purple” or one by Benjamin Moore called “Autumn Purple” are not traditional and there’s no way to know what they look like without looking at them. Burnt sienna, though, refers to a traditional pigment, a clay containing the red iron oxide and manganese oxide. Burnt sienna is burnt sienna no matter who manufactures it.

Any common object, substance, or living thing that has a stable color can be used as a color word. In a home-furnishing catalog a washcloth may be “wheat” or “blackberry.” But you can’t color something “river” and you really can’t color something “stone” (although it’s done anyway), because rivers continuously change color and stones come in reds (iron oxide), grays (granites), blues (bluestone), and yellows (calcite). Ebony, that hard, blackish heartwood of E. ebenum originating in Asia and Africa, has a stable color and it has become a common color word. Color words warm and they brighten:

As the long orange afternoon drew on, he thought, as he often did, about the rest of his life.

(Shirley Hazzard, The Great Fire, 119)

One of the pleasures of writing color is searching for color words outside a short list of red, green, yellow, and blue. Here Joe Wilkins writes of his Aunt Edith, a printmaker:

With her full, calloused hands, hands nearly as big as a man’s, she pulls the wet print from the face of the wood—all orange and fishbelly and pale blue, maybe the scab hills south of Billings at daybreak—and she studies then the colors and densities and textures, and finally hangs the print up with the others to dry.

(Joe Wilkins, “Eleven Kinds of Sky,” 37)

Note that lovely color word fishbelly. Keep in mind that colors derived from objects or living things become instantly metaphorical in that they compare one thing to another. Instantly then, the writer must work to make the metaphor intensify the character or setting or situation rather than detract from it. Wilkins’s fishbelly fits the Yellowstone River of his Montana memoir.

Just look at the wardrobe A. S. Byatt gives to Dr. Gerda Himmelblau, her story’s dean of women students:

She wears suits in soft dark, not-quite-usual colours—damsons, soots, black tulips, dark mosses—with clean-cut cotton shirts, not masculine, but with no floppy bows or pretty ribbons—also in clear colours, palest lemon, deepest cream, periwinkle, faded flame.

(A. S. Byatt, “The Chinese Lobster,” 94)

Here’s a passage I wrote about my childhood:

They stink of hay and sweat. The father is there, his face burnt dark-orange like a Jersey calf. And the twins, with their pale yellow braids and pink faces. They get paid a quarter an hour by the father’s boss. The field hands, Neil Lindsey and Buck Washington, have worked on the farm longer than anyone. Neil is a coppery-dark man, large and kindly, who lives at the end of the lane. Buck is bony and reserved, with dusty black skin the color of a bible.

(Priscilla Long, “Snapshots: The Eastern Shore of Maryland,” 98)

To state the obvious, had my father been a Wall Street lawyer, I would not compare his face-color to a Jersey calf. If Buck Washington had been a Buddhist, I would not compare his face-color to a bible.

Color connotes. Here, Ray Bradbury has no need of the word sinister to describe a stranger just arrived in a small town.

His vest was the color of fresh blood.

(Ray Bradbury, Something Wicked This Way Comes, 73)

Speaking of connotation, it’s considered disrespectful to compare the skin color of people of color to foods—chocolate or coffee or caramel. A person is not a snack. And to sexualize a person (by suggesting that he or she is edible) in a nonsexual context is to demean. I mention this because it can be done in innocence and without intending harm.





Hands On: Writing Color


Do the Here and Now exercise, this time paying close attention to color. Write slowly and mention the color of everything you see. Use as many different words for colors as you can think of. Words meaning brown: dun, auburn, burnt sienna, umber, chocolate, turd-colored, straw-colored. Her hair the color of rust.

Run comparisons. Write thinking of objects in the world that are the same color as this person’s eyes. You might write in your notebook: “His eyes were blue sort of like the sky, no—brighter, maybe like blue thistles or maybe robin’s eggs. Bleach.” Later, choose the most accurate one for color but also for the character, the situation. A character with steel-blue eyes will differ considerably from one with pale blue eyes.

Finally, remember this: Nouns and verbs are strong. Adjectives and adverbs are weak cousins, hangers-on. Do not use your color practice to proliferate adjectives in your writing. Use color verbs: dusk reddens the sky. Use nouns that emit color—walnut, eggplant, cherrywood. Add a color adjective, but force it to earn its keep by deleting two adjectives and one adverb.





OBSERVING PERSONS


We prose writers are always writing persons, whether a historical figure, a fictional character, or the shopkeeper down the street. No doubt it’s one of the first things we learn to do. Still, it’s easy to neglect one or more aspects of putting a person on the page. As a writer, I need these reminders, and I hope they are useful to you.

To write a telling portrait is to observe a person closely, to recognize who that person is. It is to observe the person in his or her body as well as in his or her actions, opinions, achievements, or derangements. It is to hear the quality of voice, to remember his or her habitual expressions or startling expressions. Portraits, even brief ones, usually include body type, dress, gesture (body language), and color (hair, skin, neon-pink spikes). Whenever a person comes on stage, he or she needs some kind of portrait (unless you are writing from his or her point of view). Call it a visual. Writing is a visual art.

Here, in a Rosamunde Pilcher story, is Edwin, ancient relative and dinner guest of Ian and Jill, a young couple unhappily obliged to cancel weekend plans when he turns up.

Edwin was coming up the steps from the street, with Ian behind him. Jill had not seen him since last Christmas and thought that he had aged considerably. She did not remember that he had had to walk with a cane. He wore a black tie and a relentless dark suit. He carried no small gift, no flowers, no bottle of wine. He looked like an undertaker.

“Edwin.”

“Well, my dear, here we are. This is very good of you.”

He came into the house, and she gave him a kiss. His old skin felt rough and dry and he smelt, vaguely, of disinfectant, like an old-fashioned doctor. He was a very thin man; his eyes, which had once been a cold blue, were now faded and rheumy. There was high color on his cheekbones, but otherwise he looked bloodless, monochrome. His stiff collar seemed a good size too large, and his neck was stringy as a turkey’s.

(Rosamunde Pilcher, “The Tree,” 38)

Edwin has body type, coloration, clothing. A common strategy is to compare the person being portrayed with some iconic figure in the culture. Edwin is likened to an undertaker, to a doctor.

A portrait can be quite short, even just a line or two:

The bartender, a small woman with Mohawked black hair and eyes lined with glitter, filled a shot glass. Vincent noticed her leather vest with silver and turquoise buttons and he noticed the tight sleeveless T-shirt and what it covered.

(Jack Remick, Trio of Lost Souls, 6)

The very split-second a character (whether fictional or actual) enters the page, he or she should get a portrait. Think of it as theater. When an actor makes an entrance you can see the character.

The more important a character is, the more space on the page he or she might occupy. But even in a brief appearance, a character has a body type. He or she dresses and moves.

Here is Alberto, in a story by Ben Fountain. Alberto commands a guerrilla army in a South American country. The protagonist, Blair, a graduate-student ornithologist, has been kidnapped. The guerrillas must decide whether or not to execute him as a spy:

Seven or eight subcomandantes were seated along the wall, while Alberto, the comandante máximo, studied Blair with the calm of someone blowing smoke rings. He resembled a late-period Jerry Garcia in fatigues, a heavy man with steel-rim glasses, double bags under his eyes, and a dense brillo bush of graying hair.

(Ben Fountain, “Near-Extinct Birds of the Central Cordillera,” 4)

And here is Oliver Sacks. The year is 1961. His motorcycle breaks down, a trucker gives him a ride, and he finds himself at Travel Happy, an Alabama truck stop. This is “another trucker’s” only appearance:

A few minutes later, another trucker shambled up, a short fat man wearing the floral shirt of the “Tropicana Orange Juice Co. Fla.,” half-unbuttoned to expose a hairy pudding belly.

(Oliver Sacks, On the Move: A Life, 90)

A portrait can be intermixed with lines of dialogue. Dialogue spoken by non-point-of-view characters should include gesture (body language) and other visuals—body type, clothing, color. In this story by Tim Gautreaux, Julian, a repairer of obsolete typewriters, has inherited an abandoned, derelict mansion. He has deluded himself that he can afford to restore it. He drives to the nearby town of Poxley to purchase, on time, a few items of furniture:

Mr. Chance Poxley, a soft, liver-spotted gentleman in a white shirt and skinny tie, also showed him a small used refrigerator.

“You can’t live without no icebox,” Mr. Poxley told him. “You’ll leave a can of potted meat out too long on the windowsill and think you can eat it the next day. Then you’ll get to throwing up all over the place. You’ll get the sick headache.” Mr. Poxley raised a blue-veined hand to his forehead.

(Tim Gautreaux, “Idols,” 5)

Later in the passage, Mr. Poxley scratches the back of his head. He squints.

In this story Julian is the point-of-view character. We look at the world out of his eyes and he is not of course looking at himself. A point-of-view character can peer into a mirror or someone else can remark on his appearance (“You haven’t shaved for days—is something wrong?”), or she can choose a dress (“She pulled on her skimpy, slinky red dress”). Only in such ways can a point-of-view character view himself or herself. Reserve most of your portrait work for your non-point-of-view characters.





Hands On: Putting Persons on the Page


In this practice you separate a person’s or character’s qualities in order to focus on each one in turn. Do each timed write in the spirit of exploration. Allow yourself to stall and stammer in the writing in order to dwell, in order to stay with something. (“He waves his arms when he talks, sort of up and down, like he’s trying to flag a taxi or something, or give signals to an airplane, what do you call that . . .”) Write for three to five minutes on each element. If you feel stuck, use negatives: she’s not obese, not short, not a redhead. Then move in closer: her hair is the color of a Chestnut horse.

•Write down one hundred concrete words associated with this person. The words might pertain to clothing, foods, hobbies, occupation or trade, books read.

•Give a macroportrait: In quick strokes give an overall picture of the person you are going to portray: “a short fat man wearing a floral shirt . . .” The macro includes body type, and then simply the most noticeable things about the person at first glance.

•Coloration: Color of hair, skin tones (everyone’s skin has coloration and no person’s skin has only one tone). Use comparison as you write; slow down in order to dwell. Write: “His face was reddish, not like strawberries but maybe more like raw beef, pink beef, well, there is a purple splotch, like purple grapes on the side of his nose. The red is a sunburned red, it has rust in it, I’m thinking of the red stones in New Mexico but it’s darker . . . His hair is the exact color of an Irish setter.” And so on. Expand your range of color description by using comparisons to common (and uniformly colored) fruits, dogs, birds, gems, vegetables, horses, etc.

•Body language: Put the person’s habitual gestures on the page. The way the person walks, moves his or her hands, weeps, laughs, talks. Consider open and shut, looseness and tightness, defended and undefended. Consider energy, agitation, stillness. The foot tapping. Arms hanging to the sides motionless.

•What the person said: exact words, exact phrases.

•Dress the person. Dress reveals character. The way people dress reveals who they are or who they think they are.

•Write for ten minutes to reflect on this person or character. What insights can you come to?

•Write a ten-minute biography of the person.

•Now compose a portrait of the person, using the most telling attributes from each of the various categories. It can be long or short, two lines or two pages.





OBSERVING GESTURE


Body language, or gesture, is as ubiquitous as speech. More ubiquitous, because it continues through silence, and in dialogue it’s a form of speech. Body language can either contradict or intensify what is said verbally:

“What do you mean?” His lips quivered.

“What do you mean?” He slammed the book down.

“What do you mean?” He knit his brow.

“What do you mean?” He grinned at her.

Or this:

“I love you,” she said, and turned away.

“I love you,” she said, and raised the gun.

“I love you,” she said. Tears streamed down her face.

Body language can hold things not consciously felt by the speaker:

“I’d love to go,” she said, looking at the ground.

Excellent writers use body language at every turn. Here’s a passage from a Rick DeMarinis story. The protagonist’s temporary girlfriend “had a way of looking at things that he could envy if he could believe it.” She states that she has stopped living her life for other people. All her obligations were voluntary.

He’d shrugged his shoulders at first, then laughed. She threw a fake karate punch at his chest. “You prick,” she said, laughing. “I guess I’m just not a subtle person,” he said. She gave him a sidelong pickerel smile, her small teeth needle-sharp, then made a machine gun of her arm and shot him dead. They collapsed into each other, in the direction of the bed.

(Rick DeMarinis, “Seize the Day,” 288)

The shrug, the laugh, the fake karate punch, the sidelong glance, the mock shooting, the collapse into the bed, all are as vital to the dialogue as the spoken words.





Hands On: Writing Gesture


•Go to a café or to some other place where people hang out and you can write about them. Choose two people sitting together. You are going to open your notebook, set your timer for fifteen minutes or a half-hour, and observe them while writing continuously. Observe their postures and gestures, the way they hold themselves, the way they move their hands, where they place their feet. Use this strategy taken from the visual arts: Look, memorize what you see, then turn to the page and write. Then look again. Note position of hands, torso, elbows. Note movements (jiggling foot, smiling, eyes, position of hands). Just detail the body language, no opinions, no speculations. And don’t worry. You’ll become a pro at averting your eyes just as your subject looks over. People are utterly absorbed in their own affairs: it’s remarkable how easily you can write on and on without being observed.

•Only after you’ve completed the observation exercise without opinion or speculation, then see if you can arrive at any insights on the body language you have observed. Decide on degree of intimacy. Decide who has more power. (Defended? Wide open? Leaning back? Leaning forward?) Give evidence for your decisions. Record how far apart or close the pair sits within a half-hour period. Is there a space barrier (how wide is it?) or has the barrier been crossed? Think about:

tension vs. ease

defended vs. open

happy vs. depressed

wary or aware vs. oblivious

intimacy vs. distance

power relations: Who has more power? Or, are they equals?

low self-esteem vs. centered, confident

Gesture work begins to give you a vocabulary of body language. The task is to work on rendering stances and gestures, to learn to name body parts—Is it “put out her hands” or “turned up her palms”?—and to become adept at including body language in dialogue and portrait.

Gesture work is character work. One man, when he talks, strokes his beard and looks into the distance. Another stares solemnly into your eyes. Yet another looks anywhere but into your eyes.





OBSERVING VOICE


Particular people have particular voices. Particular characters have particular voices. Certain works of fiction and nonfiction are entirely voice-driven. But even essays and stories not voice-driven are given authenticity by voice. People do not have neutral voices, just as they do not always say what they mean. Voices have age and region, but also individual characteristics. Paying attention to voice in the grocery store and in your reading will repay you many times.

No writer is better at voice than Grace Paley. Look at any story:

I was popular in certain circles, says Aunt Rose. I wasn’t no thinner then, only more stationary in the flesh. In time to come, Lillie, don’t be surprised—change is a fact of God. From this no one is excused.

(Grace Paley, “Goodbye and Good Luck,” 3)

And here is Annie Proulx, another master of voice:

In the spring of his final year of school he drummed his fingers on Wallace Winter’s pickup listening to its swan-necked owner pump up a story, trying for the laugh, when a knothead they knew only as Leecil—god save the one who said Lucille—walked up and said, “Either one a you want a work this weekend? The old man’s fixin a brand and he’s short-handet. Nobody wants to, though.” He winked his dime-size eyes. His blunt face was corrugated with plum- colored acne and among the angry swellings grew a few blond whiskers. Diamond couldn’t see how he shaved without bleeding to death. The smell of livestock was strong.

“He sure picked the wrong weekend,” said Wallace. “Basketball game, parties, fucking, drinking, drugs, car wrecks, cops, food poisoning, fights, hysterical parents. Didn’t you tell him?”

“He didn’t ast me. Tolt me get some guys. Anyway it’s good weather now. Stormt the weekend for a month.” Leecil spit.

(Annie Proulx, “The Mud Below,” 48)

Finally, here’s the opening to a Dagoberto Gilb story:

I’ve got two sports coats, about six ties, three dressy pants, Florsheims I polish a la madre, and three weeks ago I bought a suit, with silk lining, at Lemonde for Men. It came with a matching vest. That’s what made it for me. I love getting all duded up, looking fine, I really do. This is the thing: I like women. No, wait. I love women. I know that don’t sound like anything new, nothing every guy wouldn’t tell you. I mean it though, and it’s that I can’t say so better. It’s not like I do anything different when I’m around them. I’m not like aggressive, going after them, hustling. I don’t play that.

(Dagoberto Gilb, “Maria de Covina,” 3)

How do you write distinct voices, whether in stories or nonfiction pieces? Partly, it’s a matter of learning to hear voice. Once again, observation deepens insight. In your carry-about notebook, write down exact scraps of talk you hear at the office, in a café, on the bus, in your own kitchen. On an airplane, one flight attendant asks another, “Tom, did you talk to the overwing exits?” That’s flight-attendant lingo (passengers sitting beside exit doors must be willing to perform certain duties in an emergency). On this flight my 23-year-old niece Joanna said to her mother, “Don’t you just love the scene in The Red Violin where the old man unravels the sweater?” “Don’t you just love . . .”—that’s voice. Think about it. Would your grandfather ever say, “Don’t you just love?” Place, time, gender, generation all influence a person’s voice.

Listen for voice, and write it down. Do not plan to do anything else with such scraps, just accumulate them. You will begin listening in a new way. You will begin to hear voice.

Here’s a voice I captured of a middle-aged, white, bulky, rather jovial construction-worker type. He and I were both waiting for our appointments in a clinic. He had just explained that on a construction job-site he could remember the names of all 748 men on the job (his job involved meeting with each one each week). But, he said: “Sittin’ down at school and tryin’ to learn out of a book, I’m no good at it.”

Lee Gutkind, writer and editor of the journal Creative Nonfiction, advises that when conducting an interview for an article, the most important things to write down are the interviewee’s specific expressions. You will remember the gist of the conversation very well, but actual speech—the housepainter reminding the homeowner to “exercise the windows,” the bridge engineer speaking of excavating “in the dry”—tends to slip away. Yet that expression more than any gist captures that person and her world.





Hands On: Writing Voice


Do writing practices to capture voices you know well:

•Fifteen minutes—Write a bitter complaint in your own most colloquial voice.

•Five minutes—“My father always used to say . . .”

•Can you capture the voice of one of your friends or family members? Try. Then, next time you get together, check it out. Try again. Now use elements of what you’ve learned in a story or essay.

•Do a writing practice in which you tell something that happened to you in the most colloquial version of your own voice. Make this into a story.

Continue to observe the voices of people around you. Write it down. Can this voice (especially if it’s a voice you know well) be turned into a character’s voice?

A final word. Writing regional and ethnic voices is a nice skill, easier if the voice is one you grew up with. Study the masters. Study the works of Grace Paley, Tim Gautreaux, Annie Proulx, Dagoberto Gilb, Maya Angelou, Cormac McCarthy. Note how the great majority of words in these voiced sentences are actually written in Standard English. There is something about a sentence in which every word is bent out of standard that makes it seem caricatured.



*Berger, “Drawing,” 10.





4.


Object and Setting


The gathered, crumpled, slewed sheet, its folds like gray twigs woven together to make a nest, and its highlights like falling water, is unambiguously eloquent about what has happened on the bed.

—John Berger, on a Frans Hals painting of a nude

In real life, objects and settings carry strong meanings. No knick-knack, no set of car keys, no room is neutral or random. Compare your own living room with that of your great aunt or your best friend. The chair, the rug, the photos speak—even if obliquely—about who that person is. If you’ve ever had occasion to deal with a person’s effects after death, you know how powerfully these trinkets and packets of letters and ironed cotton handkerchiefs bare a particular person’s particular life. And so it is with fictional characters. Rooms stand for lives; objects hold history.

Compare two characters, portrayed through their respective suppers. The first is the ex-convict Socrates, the protagonist in Walter Mosley’s Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned:

He boiled potatoes and eggs in a saucepan on his single hot plate and then cut them together in the pot with two knives, adding mustard and sweet pickle relish. After the meal he had two shots of whiskey and one Camel cigarette.

(Walter Mosley, Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned, 69)

Now here, in After the Stroke, is May Sarton partaking of her supper:

The table looked beautiful with a white cloth strewn with violets—the pattern is violets—two deep red roses in the center with the silver candlesticks and tall white candles. The tenderloin roast about which I felt terribly anxious turned out perfectly.

(May Sarton, After the Stroke, 226)

Though one supper is fiction, the other fact, the techniques of detailing the suppers are identical. Far from taking up room as meaningless description, the objects—the single hotplate, the silver candlesticks—stand in for the characters themselves. Socrates with his hotplate is no corporate lawyer. May Sarton with her silver candlesticks is no ex-con cooking on a hotplate. We can take our own work to the next level by giving our character objects that represent his sorry past or her essentially European aesthetic or whatever lies at the heart of who he is.

Settings work to intensify the emotion of the story, and settings characterize. Here is an alley, seen through the eyes of the above- mentioned Socrates:

The sun was just coming up. The alley was almost pretty with the trash and broken asphalt covered in half-light. Discarded wine bottles shone like murky emeralds in the sludge.

(Walter Mosley, Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned, 13)

The alley holds tranquility. It also holds the character of Socrates. The alley is beautiful not because trash is beautiful but because this is a man who, despite his hard life, can see the beauty in things.

Places mirror lives. Here’s a workplace whose denizens, we instantly grasp, do not hobnob among the Wall Street elite:

He worked with Daisy in the clerical department of a filthy secondhand bookstore on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. The department was a square-tiled space between morose gray metal stacks of books and a dirty wall with thin white pipes running along the bottom of it. There were brown boxes of books everywhere, scatterings of paper, ashtrays, Styrofoam cups, broken chairs, the occasional flashing mouse.

(Mary Gaitskill, “Daisy’s Valentine,” 10)

If you merely list out words here—filthy, morose, gray, dirty, thin, ashtrays, Styrofoam cups, broken—you can see what powerful vehicles they are for carrying the lives of Mary Gaitskill’s wasted (though winsome) characters.

Settings ought to do double duty to intensify a story emotionally. Here’s a story whose characters are depressed and damaged, being “treated” at a mental-health facility named Pond House:

Donna looked out the window at the street below. You couldn’t open the windows. A tree outside was struggling to burst into bloom but had been compromised heavily by the parking area. Big chunks of its bark had been torn away by poorly parked cars.

(Joy Williams, “The Visiting Privilege,” 273)

Because objects occur in settings, settings and objects are interrelated. It is useful to speak of them in the same breath. They resonate metaphorically: Socrates’s rudimentary room and his hotplate stand for themselves but they also stand for Socrates’s circumstances, his history, his occupation. I read somewhere that the great Russian writer Isaac Babel, understanding how revealing objects can be, used to pay women to show him the entire contents of their pocketbooks.

Here is Ayemenem House, the setting at the center of Arundhati Roy’s masterpiece novel The God of Small Things:

Filth had laid siege to the Ayemenem House . . .

Midges whizzed in teapots. Dead insects lay in empty vases.

The floor was sticky. White walls had turned an uneven gray. Brass hinges and door handles were dull and greasy to the touch. Infrequently used plug points were clogged with grime. Lightbulbs had a film of oil on them. The only things that shone were the giant cockroaches that scurried around like varnished gofers on a film set.

(Arundhati Roy, The God of Small Things, 84)

The house, once beautiful, is a filthy ruin, as could likewise be said of the once-prosperous family that inhabited it. But one room, kept by one who has just returned, one who does not accede to the status quo, differs:

It was like a room in a hospital after the nurse had just been. The floor was clean, the walls white. The cupboard closed. Shoes arranged. The dustbin empty.

(Arundhati Roy, The God of Small Things, 87)

Shoes arranged. Dustbin empty. The psychoanalyst Christopher Bollas perceives objects as expressions of self. In Being a Character he suggests that we evoke “self experiences” by choosing objects. You might choose to order your shoes. You might choose to pick up a softball mitt on one occasion, a sonnet on another. A different person will pick up a flat of petunias or a pistol. We choose not only an activity but also the self we want to inhabit while carrying out that activity. What object does our protagonist pick up? Does the object tend to change as our protagonist changes?

Objects carry both history and desire. Fêng shui is greatly concerned with objects, and fêng shui coach Karen Rauch Carter writes in Move Your Stuff, Change Your Life that again and again she encounters relationship-seeking single women whose walls are covered with images of solitary, single women. She advises replacing these with images of couples and coupling. The idea is to portray not the reality but the intention and the desire. We writers might concern ourselves with what our protagonists put on their walls. Does this taxidermed moose-head represent who the character is or does it represent what he wishes to be?

Did I mention that settings and objects carry strong meanings? A room can stand for a character’s mood—it can look dreary or the dust can dance. Objects carry cultural meanings as well as personal meanings less accessible to an outsider. If you walked into my house you would see on the mantelpiece a carved African bowl. It was carved in Liberia some time during the mid-1960s. Considered at length it may raise cultural and historical questions and suggest a lot of history. For me personally it is also a relic of my late sister, who brought it back from the Peace Corps long ago. Does your character possess a relic of lost love or a memento of a distant place?

We writers can deepen our work by observing settings and objects—deeply and at length—and using them to enrich every page.





Hands On: Objects and Settings


Make objects do work. Make settings do work. What is that blue bowl on that yellow tablecloth good for? Why is that room dusty and why does that dust darken that room? Make settings carry the emotion, the drama, the mood, the character’s situation or past or wish.

•Describe a room of your house. Describe it from the point of view of someone who is totally depressed, has lost the love of his life, his money, his home, his wallet, his job, etc. Do not mention any of these circumstances. Only describe the room. Now describe the same exact room again, from the point of view of a happy person. (This is, essentially, John Gardner’s exercise from The Art of Fiction.)

•Now describe your character’s kitchen. Make the kitchen say everything about your character’s life. Open your character’s bottom drawer, the drawer where she keeps mementos. What are they? How do they carry her past?

•Make a list of objects for each of the characters in your novel (or memoir or story). Specify the objects to the utmost. Not just chewing tobacco but Elephant Butts chewing tobacco.