15


DUKES, DEATHS, AND DRAGONS


EDITING GENRE FICTION


DIANA GILL*

What is genre? Merriam-Webster defines it as “a category of artistic, musical, or literary composition characterized by a particular style, form, or content.” Genres of fiction include mystery, science fiction, romance, fantasy, westerns, erotica, and horror. Genre fiction can be commercial, it can be literary—and it can be both.

The one thing a genre novel must do? Entertain. It can provoke, amuse, terrify, delight, intrigue, and enchant all in in turn, but it cannot be boring. As entertainment, genre fiction competes against TV, movies, music, naps, games, cat videos, and the entire internet, anything and everything humanity can conceive to procrastinate or relax, and so above all, it must be compelling. It can illuminate, provoke thought, or call for action, but must do so while still keeping the reader engaged—for genre fiction, boredom is the true deadly sin.

What do the Harry Potter, Twilight, and Fifty Shades of Grey series have in common besides being gigantic, genre-changing blockbusters in both print and film? First, very strong storytelling (which is very difficult to teach and is not the same as writing ability) that pulled millions and millions of readers into these works and made them empathize and identify with the main characters. Second, through that character identification all three series fulfill, for their respective audiences, the universal human desire to feel special: Harry’s letter to Hogwarts makes him not only not a Muggle but actually a very special wizard; Bella Swann is chosen by the most intriguing boy in school; and only Anastasia can redeem the tortured hero Christian . . . The audience’s strong ability to identify with the main character in all three of these series drove millions and millions in sales.

Thanks to its potency as entertainment, genre fiction is a large and extremely profitable part of the marketplace, comprising more than half the publishing industry’s sales in digital form and a large percentage of print books as well. For example, romance sales in 2015 were more than 29 percent of the fiction market, according to Nielsen Bookscan. Combined with mystery/thriller and science fiction and fantasy, they made up more than a third of the entire market and more than half of the adult fiction marketplace sales for the year. Beyond that, most of the big media properties in film, TV, and computer games of the last decade-plus are derived from genre fiction, as shown by the immense successes of the Lord of the Rings movies, Sherlock, Game of Thrones, True Blood, Gone Girl, The Hunger Games, the many retellings of Jane Austen, and more.

Despite the rapidly changing marketplace, genre fiction remains an extremely profitable sector of the industry, and if you can establish yourself as a first-rate genre editor, you’re likely to have a successful career.





ACQUIRING GENRE FICTION


You cannot acquire projects in a genre if you do not know, and love, that genre.

I have loved genre fiction since I was very little and would be frankly abysmal as a mainstream literary editor. Every genre editor has a specialty, and preferences within the genre (psychological suspense à la Gillian Flynn versus action thrillers like Lee Child, historical versus contemporary romance, fantasy versus science fiction, etc.), but you will edit all types of subgenres within your genre, so expanding your tastes by reading widely throughout the genres, not just your favorite, will make you stronger and better at both acquisitions and editing. Reading romances will show you character tension and dialogue, whereas mysteries and thrillers demonstrate foreshadowing and how to create spine-tingling suspense. Science fiction and fantasy will help you recognize great world building. At times the genres can merge and create new categories, such as when romance and fantasy spawned urban fantasy and paranormal romance. The more you know about every genre, the better you’ll become at editing any one.

When acquiring genre fiction, just as when reading it, you want the stories you absolutely cannot put down—the ones you read until midnight on your cell phone (guilty as charged), the ones you can’t stop thinking about. You want to fall in love with the story and not clamber back out until the very bitter end, blinking muzzily at the time / date / missed train stop / burnt toast / patient family.

After all, if you as an editor are being paid to read a submission and do not love it (or cannot point to a viable market for it, given the nature of commercial publishing as a business), how can you convince the rest of the house to love it, much less persuade a reader to spend his money to buy it? Editors are the constant in-house champions for their titles and authors, and if you do not adore a story at the start of the process, you will certainly not love it after a year to two years of working with and on it.

Knowing the market and honing an acquiring eye take years of practice, like the old saw about Carnegie Hall, but to get started, here is a useful exercise: take five to ten bestselling commercial fiction novels across genres and read the first paragraph, then the first page of each one. You’ll see that regardless of genre—mystery/thriller, romance, or epic fantasy—every single one of these bestsellers hooks your interest. There’s something there that makes you want to keep reading, and that’s what you look for in submissions as well. On a more detailed, craft level, look at the first couple of lines of ten or so genre classics, and you’ll see the same thing, even more concisely.

Keep an open mind as well: often submissions might sound preposterous, but you truly never know . . . One submission I received sounded so small and “niche” (editor jargon for a book with a narrowly defined audience), with a seemingly preposterous title—The Nymphos of Rocky Flats—that I was certain it couldn’t work. But I picked up the manuscript and laughed out loud at the first sentence, and then throughout the entire story, and ended up publishing five books with the author. Every editor has found a submission she thought she would hate and ended up falling in love with it, so it pays to be willing to read a submission, just in case.

So you love a book—what’s next? The first task is to use the genre and subgenre of the book to determine the market and potential audience for the book. Things to consider: How crowded or mature is the market for this genre (i.e., is there room for a new breakout book)? Where does it look like it will be next year? The year after? Is it selling like crazy right now, meaning it might be overcrowded when this title comes out a year or two from now? What about three years down the line, for the sequel? Or is it an area that is starting to bubble—perhaps with self-published titles—but has room for great new voices?

Similarly, consider the competition, both in and out of house: Does the imprint or house have other books already signed that might be too similar? Would this compete with an existing project? Does another house have one that is very similar, or has someone else published a big “buzz book” along the same lines the last year or so, and how did it do? If analogous books—“comp titles” in industry jargon—did not publish to expectations, or if an imprint has published several similar stories over several years without success, it may be hard to launch this project. Every editor has had to pass on projects he or she loves because the market was too difficult, or because it was a niche or small enough project that it would be extremely tricky to publish successfully, or because the readers were simply no longer interested.

More considerations: Will readers follow these characters—are they engaging? Where does this story fit within the genre? A commercial genre story should be familiar enough that genre readers can recognize and find it, while still fresh and innovative enough that it does not feel tired. Also, this submission should ideally offer the possibility for more novels, whether a classic fantasy trilogy, a long-running detective series, or a linked band of heroes for romance. Stand-alone novels can and do work well in genre fiction—particularly if they are more literary, though that can carry its own set of challenges for publicity and sales—but the overall market and audience are very strongly weighted toward series or linked novels.1

To take one example, Kim Harrison’s Dead Witch Walking, which began the number-one New York Times bestselling Hollows series, caught my eye because for more than a year I had been looking for a supernatural series with humor. Harrison’s character, tone, and setting all were a great fit for the just-starting-to-boom urban fantasy market while her work stood out for the unique world building and voice.





EDITING: NOT JUST PRETTY PROSE


The basic mechanics and goals of editing are the same across the genres and disciplines: the end goal is to make the text as clear, engaging, and correct as possible. That said, there are some key considerations in editing genre fiction that do not apply when editing nonfiction, academic works, or literary fiction—most notably genre conventions, the importance of world building, and the primacy of series.

Each genre has its own general “rules,” or at least expectations that certain conventions will be kept within the genre novel. Horror novels, by definition, should unsettle and scare the reader, whether through psychological suspense or the “buckets of blood’” spilled in splatterpunk novels back in the 1980s. Cozy mysteries shouldn’t have serial killers and gruesomely graphic dismemberments (but baked goods, libraries, and pets often appeal), while if a dragon appears in a science fiction novel, the explanation must be rooted in science. And so forth. Genre editors must know these conventions—which ones must be kept and which can be broken—and keep in mind how this particular story should be new and fresh without violating the implicit trust of the genre readership. If you’re editing a mystery and the murder is not solved by the end of the book, the audience will not be satisfied, while romance readers expect a HEA (Happy Ever After) where the couple end up together, even if they no longer actually ride off into the sunset.

These conventions inform the shape but not the sole function of the story, so to be a good genre editor you must be widely read within the field, both to recognize Star Trek episodes with the serial numbers filed off, as it were, and to see how the story you’re reading takes a familiar trope or beloved classic and uses that inspiration in an innovative new story. John Scalzi’s Old Man’s War reinvigorated the science fiction field when it was published in 2005, in part because it harked back to the classic military science fiction of Robert E. Heinlein’s Starship Troopers, but also because it was a new, fun, and extremely accessible take on military science fiction and more, appealing both to existing fans who loved Heinlein and to new readers who had not read the classics. Old Man’s War is still immensely popular, one of the best gateway science fiction novels to introduce new readers to the genre.

World building—creating place and atmosphere—is another key factor in genre fiction. Whether a London gambling hell in Regency England like that in Sarah McLean’s superb Scoundrels historical romance series, a small town perfect for cozy mysteries, the back streets of a city rife with the supernatural, a world that becomes a character in its own right like George R. R. Martin’s Westeros, or a far-flung planet, world building is an integral part of most genres, setting the stage for the reader to enter an exciting new world. It’s not surprising that there’s a strong correlation between readers who love historical fiction and those who read genre fiction—in both, a vivid sense of place and time is key to establishing the story.

The writer’s world must feel real to the readers, and thus the author must do a lot of research and a lot of thinking about that world to make it credible and evocative. World building must serve the story: you never want the readers to get bored with pages and pages of details, or encounter a setting that requires so much suspension of disbelief that it becomes laughable. Genre editors work with their authors to avoid showing the dreaded “iceberg”—while the author needs to know huge amounts of detail about her setting for it to be credible, readers only need to see the very tip of the iceberg. Of course every genre takes license—there are enough dukes in historical romances to populate an entire metropolis, versus the very small number that exist in real life and history; in reality every inhabitant of Cabot Cove would have left the minute Jessica Fletcher appeared, and (unfortunately) there isn’t a secret Platform 9¾ at King’s Cross—but when the author uses details convincingly, the reader will accept, and savor, the story-world.

Ultimately, an editor is first and foremost a reader: an informed one with an extra set of tools, but still a reader. First reactions are important. Does the world building ground and support the story or overwhelm it? Does the story move at the right pace, neither too fast nor too slow? The setting and conceit should be intriguing or evocative but not distract from the heroine and hero and their difficulties. For example, Ann Leckie’s Ancillary Justice won the Hugo, Nebula, and Arthur C. Clarke Awards all in the same year. Using only female pronouns for all the characters regardless of gender was novel for the genre and sparked discussion across the field, but the story also worked extremely well in its own right.

Once the world building and setting are solid, a strong voice, characters, and story are all extremely important in genre fiction. Unlike literary fiction, where novels usually stand alone, genre fiction is typically published in series, some of which go on for decades—consider Sue Grafton’s Kinsey Millhone series, which started with A Is for Alibi in 1982 and is now nearing the end of the alphabet twenty-plus books later. Even romance novels, which traditionally featured one single hero and heroine, have evolved into linked series featuring families, Special Forces squads, vampire clans, or motorcycle clubs (just to name a few), so that the books are connected and favorite characters can reappear later on. This means the characters must be engaging—you can hate them or you can love them, but the minute you get bored and don’t care, the story is over.

Some long-running genre series are basically stand-alone stories with a recurring central character, but even there the character needs to slowly evolve or progress to keep the reader entertained. For example, in Lee Child’s excellent Jack Reacher series the basic elements of Reacher’s personality and general story elements remain constant for each adventure, but the reader slowly learns more about Reacher’s mysterious past as the series progresses. That combination of always-exceptional thriller action and an intriguing, enigmatic character has made Child one of the most successful genre authors, perhaps even “the strongest brand in publishing.”2 In other series where the novels are direct sequels, the editor must watch for the continuity of both story and world, along with how the characters (and again, sometimes the setting) evolve and grow throughout the novels.

The one true constant in publishing is change, and editors must be extremely flexible: both watching the larger picture of the field/market, thinking years in advance given publication schedules, and at the same time keeping close watch on the small details like the letterspacing on a cover, clues to the murder, or key points about a character or world. The editor must know where a given story fits both within the history of the genre and within the changing marketplace. This is especially true in romance, where the trends move extremely quickly and what might have worked a year ago may be extremely difficult to publish now (witness the shift from historical romance to paranormal romance, and from urban fantasy to contemporary erotica after Fifty Shades). Genre editors must keep abreast of what’s hot now versus “so last year,” but given the twelve-month-or-more timeline of traditional publishing must also try and gauge whether a trend is peaking. (Alas, we cannot predict the next trend, though are always asked and wish we could—if only to play the market and retire happily in some idyllic locale). Similarly, genre editors must pay keen attention movies and TV, video games, YouTube sensations and other elements of pop culture, as any of these can spark new areas for fiction and be a barometer for genre popularity.

Acquiring and editing a genre novel follows much the same process in-house as acquiring a mainstream novel or a nonfiction work, with a few key differences. One of the most important things with genre novels is a strong voice and story: you need and want to be swept away and fall in love with some part of the book (character, voice, story, or ideally all three). I remember reading a submission and being so caught up in the story and characters that I didn’t realize until halfway through the entire manuscript that it was in present tense, which I absolutely hate. That manuscript, Richard Kadrey’s Sandman Slim, became both a bestselling and a critically acclaimed series for me.





CASE STUDY: SORCERER TO THE CROWN, ZEN CHO


Zen Cho’s novel Sorcerer to the Crown came in with everything to check off on an editor’s wish list: a fabulous query letter, a debut author with some great short-story credentials and award nominations, and a great premise about English magicians facing all sorts of challenges, including prejudiced colleagues, plus an absolutely enchanting story with room and ideas for two potential sequels.

In terms of the market, the story appealed to the fans of Naomi Novik’s bestselling Temeraire series, which is an alternate history set in the Napoleonic era, with dragons, and to the many readers who made Susannah Clarke’s Jonathan Strange and Mr. Norrell a bestseller. The Regency London setting and hint of romance also offered crossover appeal to romance readers. And the book explores racial and feminist issues, which I knew would attract support in the indie bookstore community.

Here I had a fabulous story I loved, and the setting and themes of the book gave us a clear audience to target, in a genre that was popular but not overcrowded: All this made it a very strong candidate for us to pursue, even within an auction.

Once I bought the trilogy for Ace Books, our science fiction / fantasy imprint, the next step was the editing. Overall the manuscript was in very good shape, as the author and agent had already revised it, further revisions were still needed. I worked with the author on sharpening the opening chapters so that the story started more quickly, showing the hero’s predicament rather than telling it in numerous conversations, as well as tightening the story and pacing throughout the manuscript. We also cut the heroine’s introductory chapter, which was more preamble and in the past, so that her actual introduction in the present/main storyline had more impact. Then we worked on her goals and motivations throughout the story, to more fully develop her character and ground her plot. The narrative space we gained was used to more fully develop the main relationship. The hero’s motives and issues were more fully developed within the story arc as well. And of course there were detailed story and character notes and queries throughout. Some genre books require detailed line editing, some do not—this edit was more on the level of story/concept/characters/pacing than line-by-line revision, as the writing was very strong to start.

We announced the acquisition, as usual, with a press release to the industry and genre community. As soon as the release went out, it was clear we had something special, as authors of all types offered to read the manuscript for prepublication blurbs (this is, shall we say, not usually the case, as most high-profile authors are deluged with requests constantly). From there we began the reader outreach online and at conventions—a cover reveal at a key account, galley giveaways at conventions, talking to key booksellers while publicity pitched for reviews, and so forth. We ended up with nine blurbs from a wide range of authors, along with great reviews, including a starred review in Publishers Weekly. Sorcerer was one of PW’s Top Picks for Fall 2015, with a lot of reader/author buzz surrounding the debut. Since then the book has been shortlisted for awards and won Best Newcomer in the British Fantasy Awards.





BEYOND THE RED PENCIL


Once the manuscript is acquired and edited, genre editors have another role that nongenre editors generally don’t: engaging with the genre audiences both in person and online.

Genre audiences are incredibly involved, vocal, and voracious, forming online and offline communities and holding genre-specific conventions across the country. The closest analogue for literary fiction or nonfiction authors is location-specific book festivals, but there the speakers and topics range widely, versus “cons” where one genre—and sometimes one author, like Leakycon for Harry Potter—are the focus. The myriad genre-specific conventions include RT (Romantic Times) and RWA (Romance Writers of America) for romance; Bouchercon and Malice Domestic for mysteries (Malice Domestic is specifically for the subgenre “cozies,” like those exemplified by Agatha Christie’s Miss Marple); Thrillercon for thrillers; Worldcon, Dragon Con, & comic-cons for science fiction/fantasy; and more for horror and sf/f in general. The con behemoths like San Diego Comic Con International and New York Comic Con draw over 160,000 attendees—not including professionals and exhibitors—by focusing on comics, movies, and pop culture for the “geek” crowd. Genre editors, marketers, and publicists frequent one or more of these conventions each year for industry awards, promoting and meeting authors and agents, hand-selling titles and authors at publisher booths, and interacting with the many fans who attend. These attendees are some of the most devoted genre readers, and early buzz for a novel at conventions can do a lot to start building an author’s career. Conventions also are a place to meet authors—those you are already working with, authors at other houses, and the genre fans who might very well become your next authors.

Fan conversations go on far beyond convention halls, of course, all year round. Online and social media are also vital to genre publishing—science fiction fans were online before any other genre buffs; romance readers are now some of the largest fan/genre communities on the internet; and mystery fans love Facebook and Goodreads. This means that genre editors, more than editors in other disciplines, must increasingly be online, whether interacting with authors and readers; networking with agents and bloggers; promoting books and authors on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Tumblr, and beyond; participating in Goodreads or “street teams,” where fans of a particular genre or genre author spread the word about new books and authors; or simply keeping up with the industry news. Bloggers are another key constituency for genre publishers—where literary fiction and nonfiction depend on print reviews, genre fiction finds stronger currency in online reviews, and there are a number of extremely influential bloggers who can sway genre readers.

The importance of making connections with devoted readers is one more reason why the best genre editors are themselves genre fans. Whether it’s knowing the canon of science fiction authors or knowing whom to schmooze at RWA, your passion for the field can be one of your biggest assets. Read and love your genre (whatever that may be), and then don’t limit yourself to reading only what you work on—read genres outside your own as well. Genre is about possibilities—explore them and have fun!





16


MARGINALIA


ON EDITING GENERAL NONFICTION


MATT WEILAND*

What a lousy name “general nonfiction” has! “Nonfiction”—as if it were a negative thing, a thing defined only by what it’s not. And “general”—so shapeless, so undistinguished; it sounds suspiciously like scrap metal or bulk mail. For so glorious a thing, “general nonfiction” may sound dull and uninspiring, but I take it as a mantra and rallying cry, and have come to feel that—generally speaking, of course—readers of general nonfiction are everywhere, if only we would recognize them. To my mind it’s simple, really: a reader of general nonfiction is just one who is not necessarily already interested in the subject at hand. It’s up to the writer to entice that reader to take an interest in the people and places the writer describes, to understand and care about the ideas or issues the writer tackles, to share some measure of the writer’s fire for his or her subject.

Helping a writer form this connection with the reader—that is, to edit a manuscript—means telling the writer as candidly and directly as I can where those bonds are forming and where they are not. To this end, I’ve long been a heavy commenter in the margins of draft manuscripts. My focus is usually on structure and form: the trajectory of a book, its shape, the way it develops and progresses and resolves and (one hopes) satisfies. I must sound like the wide-eyed reader I suppose I am, forever scrawling NO WAY! or HOT DAMN or YEE-HAW, FLYING HERE in the margins. Or, given how common a problem repetition can be in a book-length manuscript, I sometimes jot a comment that a waiter at an Italian sub shop in south Brooklyn, on hearing me repeat my order, once growled at me: Yeah—you said dat already.

But all my marginal comments are aimed at helping the writer achieve the qualities of a good and lasting work of general nonfiction I value most—drive, richness, economy, clarity, and an especially elusive quality I’ve come to call curve, meaning good shape.


I might as well admit that the marginal comment I make most frequently is this: I’m bored here. Sorry! But as John Berryman wrote, life, friends, is boring—and capturing it on the page, in any form, risks being more so. Even the finest writer may find it difficult to know precisely where a manuscript sags and where a reader’s interest flags. My task, as I see it, is to help the writer identify and fix such issues.

Now, one reader’s dew-dappled-hyacinth-lolling-in-the-breeze may be another reader’s helicopter-getting-blown-up; who can say definitively what subject matter is most intrinsically interesting? So I’m not speaking of the content, exactly. In telling a writer where in a manuscript my mind wanders, I mean that the way he or she is telling the story or making the case leaves a reader feeling stuck and wanting to say, as Madam Oretta says to the knight who mangles his storytelling in Boccaccio’s Decameron, “Sir, this horse of yours has too hard a trot; please be so good as to set me down.”

Great prose has drive; it sweeps the reader along. I can still remember the exasperation in the voice of my tough but beloved high school English teacher as she looked over a broken jalopy of a piece I’d written and said just about the most exciting thing a revered teacher could say to a sixteen-year-old student: “But I want you to take me with you!” For prose to do that, it must be persuasive. Anyone who has told a story, true or otherwise, at a bar or a dinner table knows that giving your audience a sense of narrative progression is crucial. In conversation we get a wide range of feedback to indicate whether the story we’re telling or the argument we’re making is connecting—a listener may shrug or lift a brow in doubt or look around in boredom. Seeing these things, we may shift how we tell the story, fill in details, adjust the texture of our storytelling to reengage the listener’s attention. My job as an editor is to make that shrug on the page.


For many readers general nonfiction is a kind of advanced education, a way of learning about a new subject, idea, or group of people in a manageable dose with a companionable guide and without the expense or commitment or lousy food required of formal schooling. Often the writers best suited to creating such works are exceptionally knowledgeable about the subject at hand or just winningly and inspiringly obsessed. I revere that kind of passion and expertise, and relish the books that come out of it. Yet such writers sometimes only sketch details that they’ve long since absorbed but that are new or unfamiliar to the reader.

To address this problem, I often make enthusiastic checkmarks in the margins of manuscripts but add: TOO FAST! I am trying to implore writers to be as generous as possible to their readers, to assume the best of their capacity for learning, and therefore to slow down and explain or describe more. I work with a lot of journalists, whom I admire for their devotion to the craft of reporting. In newspapers, magazines, radio, television, or online, they are masters of describing what they see and hear. And yet I often find myself reminding them that they can stretch out and describe everything at much greater length and in more detail in a book.

An irony of “general” nonfiction is that it often works best when it is most specific. The New York Times reporter John Branch’s first book, Boy on Ice, was based on his front-page series of pieces about the heartbreaking early death of the hockey player Derek Boogaard. The book told the very human story of a life lived and lost in the glare of sporting fame. Branch is a dynamite reporter and writer—he is a winner of the Pulitzer Prize for feature writing, after all. But I think the book really found its shape as Branch added more descriptive passages about the prairies of Saskatchewan and the hockey towns in which Boogaard had grown up. These background details gave the book depth and texture and gave the reader enough knowledge to appreciate the full tragedy of Boogaard’s demise.

Another example is The Death and Life of the Great Lakes, a debut book by the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel reporter Dan Egan, a two-time Pulitzer Prize finalist, on the ecological catastrophe looming over the Great Lakes. In the course of editing successive drafts of the book, a powerful blend of character-driven reportage and explanatory science writing, I often found myself fascinated by some fact that Egan mentioned only in passing. Take phosphates, a key but complex source of pollution in the Great Lakes before the Clean Water Act a generation ago, and again a huge source of pollution today. I asked Egan to explain more, and—typically—he disappeared into a well of deep reporting for a few weeks and came back with an extraordinary account of the discovery of phosphorus and the ways humans have interacted with it over the centuries, which made the whole book richer.

Great works of general nonfiction get into the details—they use all that glorious space to explore beyond what author and reader may already know. I doubt I’d have said that the history of phosphorus was what general nonfiction readers were clamoring for. But in the hands of writers like Branch and Egan, such details allow books to reverberate and to live on in a way even the best newspaper and magazine articles may not. Think of such exemplary contemporary books as Eric Schlosser’s Fast Food Nation, Adrian Nicole LeBlanc’s Random Family, or Sheri Fink’s Five Days at Memorial: all of them characterized by (among other things) an extraordinary level of reported detail. With models like these in mind, the questions I ask are: Does it satisfy a reader’s full curiosity? Is it generous to the best reader you can imagine, and yet appealing to those who might not otherwise consider themselves interested in the subject? Does it treat the subject with the richness it deserves?


One of the hardest things for even the best writers to see in their own writing is the difference between the pretty good and the great. Inevitably, draft manuscripts include material that just doesn’t feel essential, that—however interesting—drags the narrative to a halt. So I frequently put a squiggly line in the margins and write those dread words TOO SLOW.

I know, I know—I just made the case for slowing down. But it’s vital to clear away extraneous good stuff to allow the great to stand tall and thrive. What I’ve long taken as the best advice for writing a book comes from Miles Davis, and it may be apocryphal. But the story goes that someone asked him, in the period when he was writing extraordinarily spare and powerful compositions, how he did it. Davis said this: “It’s easy. I always listen for what I can best leave out.” As I read a manuscript, I’m often looking for ways it can move faster, that it can be tighter. Sometimes this can mean cutting a line or a passage that was the kernel for the whole book. As playwright Sarah Ruhl put it in 100 Essays I Don’t Have Time to Write, “What seems like the most necessary thing in your play might be the least necessary thing.” And sometimes it can mean cutting an excess of examples or vignettes, which writers often pile on to prove a point. As vivid as these may be, the point is usually stronger when just one of them is used. Pick your best punch, I tell the writer, in order to avoid having your fists crowd each other out.

Of course, suggestions for cuts can be perilous. A couple of years ago an agent called me and said, “I’ve got a great proposal for a book—I’m not sure what it is, but it roars.” It was a memoir of life on the road by a long-haul truck driver named Finn Murphy, and reading the sample material that night, I thought two things: First, he’s totally right—Murphy has a sound on the page that rings in my ears; and second, I know exactly what it is: it’s the book Anthony Bourdain might have written had he become a trucker instead of a cook. We duly signed it up, and I had a ball working with Murphy. But somewhere in the editing it I told him I felt the extensive material about his middle years, when his life took a wrong turn and he took a long break from trucking, should be cut. Much as I enjoyed his account, it seemed to me to break the spell of the book. He cheerfully said he saw my point, and out it went.

We published Murphy’s book, The Long Haul, to strong sales and rapturous reviews. Oh, the thrill of seeing it greeted by a rave from the daily book critic Jennifer Senior of the New York Times! She hailed his knack for telling astonishing stories and called the book “almost shamefully enjoyable.” But she also said this: “Midway through The Long Haul, he does something disconcerting and entirely unexpected: He gives up driving. . . . And he never says why. Now, I’m not saying this omission is on par with the 18½ missing minutes of conversation between Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman. But it does seem like a literary crime of some sort.”

Reader, that criminal was me.


As long as I’m confessing how rude and coldhearted I am on the page, I might as well reveal that in editing a book I also aim to be as ignorant as possible. In an effort to help the writer know precisely where her point is not coming through clearly and convincingly, I write LOST ME HERE in the margin.

I try to help the writer resist the temptation to prove his or her mastery of the subject and to embrace the fact that there are always other writers (and readers) who know more about it. A book is not an exam; the writer’s task is not to demonstrate that he is the one and only expert in whatever he’s writing about.

I also remind the writer that clarity is king. “There is nothing that requires more precision, and purity of expression, than to write in a familiar style,” as the great English essayist William Hazlitt put it nearly two hundred years ago. “To write as anyone would speak in common conversation who had a thorough command and choice of words, or who could discourse with ease, force, and perspicuity . . .” To me these are the cardinal virtues of strong, convincing English prose. (Hazlitt’s last term, meaning “clarity,” is now, alas, an antique word.)

Sometimes I scrawl HUH? in the margins to indicate that I’m not sure the writer is being fair to those who might disagree with her or is not representing other views fairly or fully enough. In such cases I encourage her to do this thought exercise: What would a reader (or reviewer) who doesn’t sympathize with your position say? The point is to give the writer a chance to inoculate herself against obvious criticism—and thereby make the book stronger.

I also encourage the writer to reveal her own ignorance, even about the subject she is writing about. I think of two classic works of general nonfiction that left a deep mark on me, both—as it happens—about building a house: Tracy Kidder’s House and Michael Pollan’s A Place of My Own. Each imparts an enormous amount of information about carpentry, house building, and architecture generally—but in each, the author allows the reader to learn along with him by presenting himself as on a kind of quest to understand his subject.

In 2015 I published a debut work of general nonfiction in this distinguished line: Hammer Head: The Making of a Carpenter by Nina MacLaughlin, in which she told of leaving her job at a newspaper to become a professional carpenter. The book was hailed by one perceptive reviewer as being “like if Annie Dillard had her own show on HGTV.” MacLaughlin excelled at capturing the details of her experience, explaining her work and the ways in which becoming a tradesperson changed how she looked at the world (and how the world looked back at her). But the book really took flight in revision, when she winningly adjusted the early chapters to reflect the degree to which she didn’t yet know what she was doing.


A great work of general nonfiction is a living, breathing thing. Like anything alive, it may have gangly bits, knots, asymmetries. But to keep a reader’s attention and have maximum effect, it’s got to have good shape, curve, and my most profound task is helping the writer find it. Curve often depends, I find, on the shape and sequence of the chapters themselves, the degree to which they contribute to the arc of the book and yield a sense of narrative progression. On early drafts I may ask about a chapter: What is its point? What problem does it pose and how does it address it? Where does it take us?

Achieving this sense of curve is hard and can prove frustrating to author and editor. It often requires not marginal comments but deep conversations on the nature of the book itself. I relish these, and if I’ve been of any use to the writers I work with, it’s often because I’ve tried to wander just as deep into a dark wood as they have. In these conversations an editor, I believe, has to be willing to be wrong—to suggest the wrong thing, to ask the wrong question—in the service of finding the right solution.

Assuming the raw material (of story, character, scene, and style) is good, the questions I may raise about structure are often borrowed from other art forms: Is the bass too heavy in this part? Why is there so much yellow in the corner of the painting? I often find it useful to switch metaphors—postpunk to kitchen-sink drama; soccer to impressionism—to find whatever helps the writer understand what the experience of reading the manuscript is like for someone else, and adjust it as necessary to achieve maximum force. There is no cynicism in acknowledging that great works of general nonfiction manipulate the reader this way. As in chess, a particular move—the shape of a chapter—is often made to set up the next one or the subsequent ones.

My best lesson on achieving curve came in the 1990s, when I had a small hand in working on several of Studs Terkel’s timeless works of oral history, some of the finest works of general nonfiction I know. A little later I started working with Craig Taylor, who I believe is the nearest thing to an heir to Terkel. Taylor’s bestselling book Londoners, which he spent six years reporting, was based on his in-depth interviews with more than two hundred people. But his draft manuscript was some 1.1 million words—at least five or six ordinary books of ordinary length—and unsequenced. As we sought together to carve out the one great book within it, to find its best shape, we spent months arranging and rearranging index cards listing each piece. Ultimately we relied on Terkel’s model in thinking of the book as collage, or better still as bebop, with scenes and characters riffing off each other and building to various climaxes even as the book as a whole developed. That intense back-and-forth conversation about the book’s shape (and cutting almost 90 percent of the material) yielded what the New York Times Book Review hailed as “a rich and exuberant kaleidoscopic portrait” of the city and “a master-class in self-effacing journalism.”

To take another example: In 2015 I published Mary Norris’s Between You & Me, a bestselling book about language filled with colorful details from Norris’s nearly thirty-five years in the celebrated copy department of the New Yorker. As I read the draft material, I’d buttonhole my colleagues in the hallways to say, You have GOT to read this. But while there were many laugh-out-loud moments and loads of useful language tips, the book lacked curve. At one point in the editing process, Norris wrote me to apologize (unnecessarily!) for falling behind schedule, and added this: “Also wondering if it should be this hard.” Of course I tried to reassure her, but I also tried to prod her into writing in a slightly different mode:

It should be this hard, yes—it often is. That’s nothing to be afraid of or worried about! But a lot depends on your ability to think like a chapter—i.e., to craft chapters that have narrative propulsion; that carry a reader through a series of questions or things the narrator wants to explore. . . . There has to be story, has to be a reason we’re following you, and reading of your experiences.



Typically, Norris took my small, vague effort to prod her to reach new heights and soared with it. (“Gotcha,” she wrote back. “Feeling edited! There should be an emoticon for that.”) She began to send remarkable accounts of her family and life both within and beyond the corridors of the New Yorker, including her contemporary travels to such places as a pencil-sharpener museum and Noah Webster’s birthplace—and to seamlessly weave these in with her sterling advice regarding grammar and usage. As she did so, the book really took shape. Her celebrated chapter “The Problem of Heesh,” for example, about the thorny problem of using he or she or they without implying a particular gender, came together when she told the moving story of having a transgender sibling and its effect on her own view of personal pronouns. She nailed it! And I was thrilled to tell her so, dipping into the Italian which we’d both studied haphazardly over the years. To which Norris, in her inimitable style, replied:

So glad to have hit the mark.

P.S. Ermafrodito is masculine, by the way.




Ultimately, like a toolmaker or a tailor, I aim to be useful to the author but invisible to the reader. The marginal comments I make are best forgotten. Whether the writers I work with follow my editorial suggestions or not, what I hope they remember is the spirit in which they’re made—an enduring commitment to a writer’s ideas and style, a passion for making them public, and a diehard belief that there are plenty of good readers for great general nonfiction on any subject.





17


ONCE UPON A TIME LASTS FOREVER


EDITING BOOKS FOR CHILDREN


NANCY SISCOE*





THE WHY


When I tell people that I edit children’s books for a living, their first response is usually “That sounds like fun.” And often it is.

It can also be heartbreaking—when a book I adore doesn’t find an audience. And heart-swelling—when a child tells me a book I’ve edited has made her love reading.

From a creative standpoint, it is immensely satisfying. It is my job to help authors craft the best possible expressions of their stories. It’s also my job to find the right words to explain to the rest of the world how brilliant those stories are. The days when I feel I’ve done those things well are truly rewarding.

But, as with any job, being an editor is also frustrating (when I lose out on a book I desperately wanted), boring (meetings, paperwork, more meetings), and relentless (there is always something more I could do, should have done, need to do to help the books succeed).

Really, fun doesn’t even scratch the surface of it.

I edit children’s books because I love them. I loved them as a child and never stopped loving them. I edit children’s books because I think kids deserve the best we have to offer. Because the books I read as a child thrilled me and expanded my world and live on inside me. Because I want to help create the books that will delight and inspire the next generation of readers.

The books we read as children have an indelible impact. Most people can remember their first favorites in great detail. They are like cherished friends—first loves. But try to recall the plot of a book you read two or three years ago . . . Children’s books last. Who wouldn’t want to be part of that?

In my first week on the job as an associate editor, my new boss gave me a copy of Isaac Bashevis Singer’s comments upon being awarded the National Book Award for Children’s Literature. I’ve kept it in my “inspiration” file ever since, as it never fails to reorient me if I’m in danger of losing sight of the audience.

There are five hundred reasons why I began to write for children, but to save time I will mention only ten of them. Number 1: Children read books, not reviews. They don’t give a hoot about the critics. Number 2: They don’t read to find their identity. Number 3: They don’t read to free themselves of guilt, to quench their thirst for rebellion, or to get rid of alienation. Number 4: They have no use for psychology. Number 5: They detest sociology. 6: They don’t try to understand Kafka or Finnegans Wake. 7: They still believe in God, the family, angels, devils, witches, goblins, logic, clarity, punctuation, and other such obsolete stuff. 8: They love interesting stories, not commentary, guides, or footnotes. 9: When a book is boring, they yawn openly, without any shame or fear of authority. 10: They don’t expect their beloved writer to redeem humanity. Young as they are, they know that it is not in his power. Only the adults have such childish illusions.





THE WHAT


It’s the audience, of course, that distinguishes children’s books from adult books. And so editing them requires that you keep in mind the intended readers and what they want in a story. What a toddler wants is obviously not the same as what a ten-year-old wants, so there are different formats and categories of books to suit different audiences. In broad strokes, they are as follows:

• Board books. Sturdy books for babies and toddlers. They are designed for small hands (and emerging teeth). The simplest are about early concepts—colors, numbers, object identification, new words. The more complex tell short stories or are reprinted versions of young picture books. Classic examples: I Am a Bunny by Ole Risom, illustrated by Richard Scarry; Moo Baa La La La by Sandra Boynton; Black & White by Tana Hoban.

• Picture books. Larger-format, fully illustrated books, usually thirty-two pages long, for toddlers through school-aged kids. At the younger end, there is little text and the pictures do the lion’s share of the storytelling. At the older end, the stories can be quite complex and the interaction between the text and artwork gets more nuanced. Picture books are deceptively simple, compact treasures. Classic examples: Where the Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak; Don’t Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus by Mo Willems; The Snowy Day by Ezra Jack Keats.

• Leveled readers. Specifically designed for kids just learning to read. The word choices and sentence structures are simple, and the artwork offers clues to help readers decode the text. Classic examples: The Cat in the Hat by Dr. Seuss; Frog and Toad Are Friends by Arnold Lobel; Fox on Wheels by Edward Marshall, illustrated by James Marshall.

• Chapter books. For newly independent readers, generally seven to ten years old. These short novels (say 75 to 125 pages) with illustrations bridge the gap between picture books, readers, and longer novels. Series are extremely popular with this age group. Classic examples: the Magic Tree House books by Mary Pope Osborne, the Ivy & Bean books by Annie Barrows, The Stories Julian Tells by Ann Cameron.

• Middle grade. For independent readers, generally ages eight to fourteen. There’s a huge range within this category, from simple to mind-blowingly complex, with an explosion of genres—fantasy, historical fiction, adventure. Classic examples: Charlotte’s Web by E. B. White; The Golden Compass by Philip Pullman; Bud, Not Buddy by Christopher Paul Curtis.

• Young adult. For older, more sophisticated readers, generally ages fourteen and up. There’s overlap with adult books in this category, and many books can (and do) sit comfortably in both worlds. YA books tend to have teen protagonists, coming-of-age themes, and an expanding view of the world. Classic examples: The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian by Sherman Alexie, Speak by Laurie Halse Anderson, The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins.





THE HOW


The books are created for children, but an editor must also be mindful that they are usually purchased by adults. Parents, grandparents, teachers, and librarians choose most of the books that younger children read. These gatekeepers are so influential that it’s not uncommon for books to be created specifically for them. Most gatekeepers play a benevolent and beneficial role. On the dark side are would-be censors who want to ban certain children’s titles from schools or libraries.

Of course editors are gatekeepers too, of a sort. I say no to more than 90 percent of the manuscripts that cross my desk. The most emphatic nos: No moralizing, no finger-wagging, no thinly veiled adult agendas. Kids can spot a good-for-you book in a heartbeat. Eye-rolling starts young.

Philip Pullman says it best: “We don’t need lists of rights and wrongs, tables of dos and don’ts, we need books, time, and silence. Thou shalt not is soon forgotten, but Once upon a time lasts forever.”

Another piece I keep in my inspiration file is an article by the renowned editor Richard Jackson. Jackson describes the essential questions an editor learns to ask when reading any new piece of writing for young readers: “Does this story convince me? Do I care what happens to these people? Is the voice authentic? Has a young person’s nature somehow caused the action? Have I read this before?” I try to keep all of those considerations and questions in mind when I’m deciding whether to take on a new book.

And beyond that, I’m thinking about what the author’s next book might be, and the next. I always hope a long-term relationship will grow. Every editor has her own approach, and every author needs something a little bit different, so I try to gauge whether the author and I will make a good team. An agent acts as a matchmaker in that sense—sending the right writer to the right editor.

The vast majority of manuscripts do come to me through agents. Sometimes a project will come from a friend of a writer I already work with, or I’ll find a new talent at a conference or suggest that someone not currently writing for children might want to try it. But mostly I’m reading submissions from agents and hoping for that spark of joy that comes with finding something new.

Of course the competition for that new voice is intense. Heated auctions are common. And so after weeks of convincing yourself a book is wonderful, and persuading the rest of your team to be excited about it too, and running profit-and-loss estimates, and getting approvals to make an offer, and putting your best offer together, after all that, you can still lose out to someone else. So deflating.

On the flip side, winning a book at auction is exhilarating!


It’s not the acquiring I love most, though; it’s the editing. The time the author and I spend working together, trying to make the story sing. Here’s a look at how that process works for some different types of books.





Picture Books


I’ve heard it said that there are two types of readers—those who read to understand their world and those who read to escape. As I’m a largely escapist reader myself, this resonates. But for the youngest readers, pretty much all books are about understanding their world.

To a baby everything is new, and so the youngest books are all about recognition. This is you, these are the things around you—your family, your room, your house, your yard, your neighborhood. Understanding ripples outward, with the child always at the center.

For me things start to get really interesting when a child is old enough to add emotion into the mix. That’s when you can start telling stories. The stories are still focused on understanding the world and the people in it—but oh, the great variety that encompasses. This is the realm of most picture books.

The perfect picture book is often defined as one where neither the text nor the art would make sense on its own. There are notable exceptions, of course—wordless picture books can be wonderful, and some texts can easily double as poetry. But it’s most often true: a picture book consists of words and pictures working together to tell a story.

A picture book is also largely defined by the format. Just thirty-two pages. Those pages can be bigger or smaller. Crammed with art and text or left open and airy. But the length is pretty standard—determined by the way the books are printed, in sixteen-page signatures. You can add sixteen more for a forty-eight page book, but that often feels too long and is expensive to boot.

With a set number of pages, the pacing of a picture book becomes crucial. You want roughly the same amount of text on each spread so that the pages get turned at a consistent rate. And anyone who’s sat with a child on her lap knows kids like the pages to turn fairly quickly.

First drafts are often too long. There’s too much story and not enough space. And so the author and I begin the process of winnowing down. We’re forced to decide what’s truly essential to the story and what’s taking up unwarranted space.

I often begin by making a map—a view of the book in miniature, all on one page. You block out the pages needed for a title page and a copyright page. How the story begins and ends is often clear, so you rough those in, and then you have a view of the space remaining to get from here to there.

Here’s an example: Dan Yaccarino and I were working on a picture book called Billy and Goat at the State Fair. Billy and his pet goat are best friends, even though they have different temperaments—Billy likes to smell the flowers, and Goat likes to eat them. When the state fair rolls around, Goat is dying to go. Billy doesn’t like the crowds and noise, but he does think Goat deserves to be in the best goat competition, so off they go. First thing, Goat takes off to explore the fair, and Billy chases after him. When he catches him at last, Billy realizes the fair is pretty exciting—as long as he’s with his pal. They end up missing the best goat competition completely, but neither minds, for they’ve spent a great day together.

Dan is both an author and an illustrator, so the first draft I saw included sketches of the art he had in mind. There were brilliantly funny pictures of Billy and Goat at the fair riding roller coasters and log plumes. Dashing through displays of flowers and pies. Playing games of chance and eating corn dogs. They were all fabulous! And lots of them got cut. After reading the first draft again and again, we realized that the attractions of the fair were overpowering the story. We had oodles of middle and not so much beginning and end.

So we allowed more space at the beginning to get to know our two friends. (Even picture books need character development.) We needed space to show Goat’s excitement for the fair and Billy’s apprehension. We knew we needed space at the end for the rush back (too late!) to the goat competition, and a final page for the resolution. With all that blocked in, we saw what space remained for the fair. In roughly the middle of that section we needed to focus on the place where Billy catches up with Goat, finally takes a look around him, and decides the fair is more exciting than scary. This emotional pivot is crucial to the story and needed some time to feel genuine. We added another page there.

Bit by bit the space available for showing the rides and displays got smaller, but the story got clearer and stronger. It sounds easy in retrospect, but the process is painful, with lots of false steps and erasures before things finally feel right. Once we had the map of the story set, Dan could go back and revise the text and refine the pictures.

Key to the pacing and rhythm of a picture book are the page turns. Eric Rohmann is a master of the page turn (among many other things!) and taught me much about their potential while we were working on A Kitten Tale. Each turn of the page is this little moment of suspense. The pregnant pause between cause . . . and effect. Between action and reaction. Using these pauses well can add lots of drama to a story. The trajectory of a book is often determined by feeling it is absolutely crucial to turn the page . . . there.

In the case where the author and illustrator are not the same person, it’s the editor, along with the art director, who has the delight of choosing what kind of illustrations will best suit the story. Pairing a text with an artist is a bit like matchmaking—ideally the two together will add up to more than the sum of their parts.

Usually a picture book begins with the text. Occasionally I’ve done books where the art exists and I’m trying to craft a story that holds it together—tricky. It’s more often the case that I’ll be searching for a text that will be a good vehicle for an illustrator I’ve been hoping to work with.

Spotting a text that tells enough of a story to spark the imagination but also leaves room for an artist to add to and complete the story is a skill acquired over many years. Usually you begin with too much text.

One book where the text was, I thought, admirably brief was An Annoying ABC by Barbara Bottner and illustrated by Michael Emberley. It began: “Adelaide annoyed Bailey. Bailey blamed Clyde. Clyde cried.” On it went—a tale of woe through an alphabet of kids. Barbara and I imagined all the kids together in a preschool classroom with events escalating to an all-out disaster by the time we get to Zelda, who turns her wrath back on Adelaide, who eventually . . . apologizes. It was funny and clever—and left a huge job for the illustrator.

It fell to Michael Emberley to figure out just what Adelaide did to annoy Bailey, and why Bailey then blamed Clyde. Each annoying action had to lead logically to the next. It was a twenty-six-link chain of events that all had to unfold Rube Goldberg–like to the desired end. All hail Michael, who made just brilliant choices and pictures.

In books for the younger end of the picture book audience, the art and text work together to tell the same story. But as the audience gets older and more sophisticated, text and art can sometimes contradict each other to great comic effect. Julia Sarcone-Roach’s The Bear Ate Your Sandwich is a good example. An unseen narrator tells the story of a bear who falls asleep in the back of a truck and wakes to find himself in a “new kind of forest.” But the pictures show the bear in the heart of a city. The text describes good trees for scratching (telephone poles), squishy mud underfoot (wet cement), and a cool pool for bathing (a fountain in a park). While in the park, the bear, understandably hungry, spots “your beautiful and delicious sandwich, all alone.” After his snack the bear hightails it back to the forest, but the story has a final surprise. The unseen narrator is revealed to be a dog—spinning the whole shaggy-dog tale for a skeptical girl.

Do six-year-olds understand the concept of an unreliable narrator? Yes, they do! And their parents appreciate the joke as well. It is kind to remember that picture books are frequently read to a child by a tired adult at bedtime and to try to make the experience fun for that parent as well.

The best way to ensure a happy reading experience is to read the book aloud yourself. Note the places you stumble, where a sentence goes on too long, where the words don’t quite flow. I’ll read sections aloud as the book gets revised, and then one last time before it goes to the printer.

At their best, picture books are a point of connection between adult and child—offering a shared love, an inside joke, or the origin of a family saying. As I edit, I imagine these things happening and plant a few seeds. “Let the wild rumpus start!”





Novels


Once children can read, the possibilities open up exponentially. They can decide for themselves what kind of stories they want. They understand enough about the world to escape it if they choose, and so in addition to realistic fiction you start to see fantasy, mystery, historical fiction, adventure, horror, and more.

I imagine the editing process for a novel for children is much the same as for a novel for adults. But everyone has their own variations on the theme, so here’s what I normally do.

I read the book from start to finish. Just read, with no pencil in hand. Ideally in one long gulp. Then I start taking notes. What did I love? What didn’t make sense? Where did things lag? Where did they move too quickly? What themes are emerging? Are they clear enough? Too overt?

After I’ve jotted down all my first impressions, I put the book away and give myself some time to think about what’s on the page now and about the story I sense the author wants to tell. I think about what needs to happen to move from one to the other.

Then I read the book again more slowly, outlining each chapter as I go. I’ll start writing notes to the author in the margins—asking questions, pointing out inconsistencies, noting wonderful turns of phrase and all the places that make me laugh or cry. If it’s a book where timing matters, I’ll keep a running timeline of events as well. From there I usually make a more concise map, one that shows where the major events of the story fall so I can see if they are well spaced or all bunched together. I can also see if there are long stretches where nothing essential is happening. With those insights, I go back through the pages again, adding more notes in the margins, suggesting where things might be condensed, offering alternate wordings.

Before I begin an editorial letter to the author, I return to my first impressions. Have they held up after repeated readings? Have new questions arisen? New ideas for where to go from here? I try to articulate in the letter all those big-picture thoughts about the story—what’s working well, what might be emphasized more, and what could perhaps go.


So what specific considerations go into a novel for middle graders?

Carl Hiaasen asked me this before he began his first kids’ book, Hoot, and what I told him cuts to the heart of it: never talk down to your reader.

Kids may lack information, but they don’t lack intelligence. Yes, you may need to offer some context that an adult reader would be expected to know already. But never for a minute assume that you are smarter than your reader. Kids can smell condescension and they’ll stop listening. They get enough lectures—you’re telling a story. Put a kid at the center of the action, view the world through their eyes, and let the story flow from there.

That’s another point that’s worth stressing—a kid should be at the center of the action.

This came up in the first book I worked on with sports writer John Feinstein. John had written a terrific story about two kid reporters who get a chance to cover the Final Four basketball tournament and discover that someone is trying blackmail a player into throwing the final game. The book was exciting and offered a rare behind the scenes glimpse of a major sporting event. But the first draft veered off course a bit at the end.

In the big denouement, the kids figured out what was going on, but then adult characters swooped in and saved the day. Realistic? Maybe. Satisfying to a kid reader? Not so much. The kid characters need to be the prime actors. They need to solve the puzzle and get themselves out of trouble and save the day. John came up with a brilliant alternate scenario that let the kids be the heroes.

I spend a lot of time thinking about the pace of a novel. Kids tend to be impatient readers, so I’m always looking for ways to move things along faster. (Of course it could also be that I am an impatient reader. But mostly I blame it on the kids.)

Here again Philip Pullman says it so well: “In a book for children you can’t put the plot on hold while you cut artistic capers for the amusement of your sophisticated readers, because, thank God, your readers are not sophisticated. They’ve got more important things in mind than your dazzling skill with wordplay. They want to know what happens next.”

This was my major concern in Wendelin Van Draanen’s first novel, How I Survived Being a Girl. I remember reading the book as an unsolicited submission and falling in love with the main character’s voice. The daring exploits of Carolyn and her brothers as they spied on the neighbors and dug up someone’s yard made me laugh out loud. I also remember grumbling quite a lot at the long and rambling sidetracks Carolyn went off on as she told her story. I found myself skimming and skipping ahead—yeah, yeah, but what happens next?

And so I wrote to Wendelin and said I liked her story but would she please cut it in half. If she was willing to try, then I’d read it again. I may have been nicer about it than that, a smidge more encouraging, but not much.

I stand by the advice. Cutting a story down to what’s essential is as important in a novel as it is in a picture book. But I cringe now at how glibly I delivered my suggestion for such major surgery. How brutal I must have sounded. How easily she might have tossed my letter aside.

The story ends well. Wendelin did revise the book and it was the first novel I acquired on my own—a huge milestone for any young editor. Wendelin and I have now worked on thirty-four (and counting) books together. We are an awesome team. So when I think back on the terseness of my first letter to her, I feel the weight of all I would have missed out on had she responded differently.

I remind myself to be clear and kind and encouraging. Always.


For middle-grade novels I do consider the gatekeepers. I do think about what’s appropriate for a young reader. Can we convey strong emotion without cursing? Usually. Do we need that graphic violence and gore? Usually not. I also think about the kind of world we’re portraying. Do we need to pretend the world is sunshiny all the time? No. But do we need to depict it as unrelentingly bleak either? I don’t think so.

This is not to say I think middle-grade books should shy away from tough subjects. On the contrary, I think a book can be the best place for a kid to first encounter some of the evils of the world. Better in the safe confines of a book than in real life. But I also think the author and editor have a responsibility to know when something might be shocking and to treat it with care.

Hope is essential.

Here again, I am guided by the wise editor Richard Jackson: “A [middle-grade] novel ends not with happily ever after, but with a new beginning, with the sense of a lot of life left to be lived.”

For young adult novels, I let all those thoughts of gatekeepers go. What’s appropriate is based solely on what feels right for the story. Teens can and often do read adult books. They watch the news. They survived junior high! They are well aware that the world is a flawed place. So why not give them stories about how characters respond to the worst that life throws at them? The censors disagree, of course, but they’re fighting a losing battle. What could be more enticing to a teen than a book some adult thinks they shouldn’t be allowed to read?

In the end, it turns out my advice for all children’s authors is essentially the same: put a kid at the center of the action, look at the world through their eyes, and let the story flow.





18


LIVES THAT MATTER


EDITING BIOGRAPHY, AUTOBIOGRAPHY, AND MEMOIR


WENDY WOLF*

What could be simpler?

Writing a biography—the story of a life—means conforming to a preexisting chronology, as life naturally lays down its own patterns and rhythms. An author just has to assemble the parts in the right order, make sure of his facts, and then get out of the way. If he is writing an autobiography—the story of his own life—he’s won half the battle already (he knows how the story goes). The editor’s job must be equivalently easy, pruning out a few errant details here and there, right?

In fact, after forty years of editing biography and autobiography—political, historical, academic, comic, literary, athletic, wistful memoir and hard-hitting investigative biography—I can assure you that nothing is more complicated than getting a life down on paper, making it real, and getting it right.

But regardless of whose life an author has chosen to document and which approach she has chosen to follow, I always begin with two simple, crucial questions: Why does it matter? And to whom? Without thinking through those questions, a writer is lost in the wilderness before she starts, so my counsel is to take some time and be honest. The answers will dictate everything from the author’s vocabulary and voice, the sources she trusts, the notes she publishes, and the details she includes and leaves out, to the conclusions she draws and the editor she works with. And if she can’t at least take a well-placed jab at the answers at the beginning, it will be impossible for any editor to help her find her way home from that wilderness.

Of course there’s a third question: What’s new here? Scholars in particular presume that’s the first question, and certainly new sources or new interpretations are crucial to a biography, particularly in dealing with an already well-scrutinized life. To me, though, novelty is a necessary but not sufficient premise.

As an editor at a major trade publishing house, I weigh projects with the same concerns as all my colleagues in other genres—who’s going to care, or, to put it more bluntly, who’s going to care enough to spend thirty (or fifty) dollars just because there’s a previously undiscovered cache of letters, or an eyewitness produced after thirty years of silence? How much does this new information change what we know? Does this life have reverberations beyond its own confines? The answers to these questions help me determine whether this is a trade book, with the possibility of a broad readership beyond the university or the family (for memoir or family biography), or whether it’s a valuable contribution in its field but probably for a limited set of readers.

Over and over, authors tell me that we should care about this person’s contributions to neurobiology, or her experiences during the French Revolution, but frankly, few readers really do. With Wikipedia providing what most people want to know about most of the facts of most lives with enough accuracy to satisfy most casual inquiries, why bother?

Every time I see in a proposal the phrase “There’s never been a biography of _____,” I shudder. Usually there’s a good reason why. The fact that there hasn’t been a book on Y since 1954 may not be enough either, just on the face of it. And let’s be honest, very few people who aren’t professionally paid to do so are actually going to buy and read a book about an unknown horsemaster’s daughter’s life in fifteenth-century Morocco, even if there is a really good diary. Unless the author can bring her to life the way Laurel Ulrich did with an eighteenth-century midwife in A Midwife’s Tale.

So yes, I do want to know what’s new—but that’s not enough. The books that I most love to publish offer new information and new interpretations but also, more urgently, something more than just documenting the life under scrutiny. I listen for passion in the writer’s voice; I want to hear that the story of this life casts light on more than itself—if it reaches through history to explain something about my world to me, or is about a world that it’s important, or entertaining, to know more about. To know why the author cares—and how he will make me care.

Remember, I’m a kind of gatekeeper, but only to one particular pasture. There are many others out there, and that’s why an author must begin with his own passion and commitment; it’s what will see him through. He may be writing for an audience of two—himself and his grandson—and there is no more legitimate motivation. Or because he simply loves researching and writing about the political lives in Ethelred the Unready’s court. That’s not a reason to stop. But it’s a reason to gauge one’s expectations.


The art of great biography is found as much in what the writer leaves out as in what she includes. There is nothing I dread more than reading (or worse, having to edit) what I call the “He went here, he went there” kind of life that simply records a litany of dates and events without interpretation or without emphasis. Not every day of my life is interesting, and neither was every day of FDR’s, trust me. That litany, however, may be where one has to start. One of my great privileges was working with Manning Marable on his monumental biography Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention. I came into the project after Manning had already devoted ten years to the documentation phase; when he decided it was time to get a publisher, he had written pages and pages, and he and a retinue of devoted students had assembled something known, in reverential terms, as “the Chronology”—a day-by-day, sometimes hour-by-hour, account of Malcolm’s every known move, deed, appearance, conversation. It took up literally reams of yellow legal pads, scrawled in pencil and pen, taped together, stacked up, pinned across endless walls. On these pieces of paper, Manning was physically assembling a life.

But most nonfiction books generally begin with proposals, and this one was no different. Manning’s was missing certain things we often expect now: ideas for marketing, or demonstration of media savvy, and if someone in 2001 had used the phrase “author platform,” I would have expected plywood. But the proposal made clear, and my preliminary meeting in my office with Manning confirmed, that this was a once-in-a-lifetime chance to acquire the defining account of a towering figure of the twentieth century, and that there was no other writer who could bring together the background, the context, the insights—and the pigheadedness—it would take to write it. We signed a contract and expected to have a book to show the world in about four or five years, not an unusually long delivery date for such an ambitious project, with archives still to plunder and plot lines to wrangle into shape.

Of course, nothing works out quite as you plan—and over the next decade, we worked as a team to bring the book home. One of the first things we agreed on was that simply printing up Malcolm’s life in real time was not the goal. We had to make what I would call the case for Malcolm as a uniquely American figure. We needed to understand the worlds through which Malcolm moved, the America that blacks lived in and the ones that whites lived in, in the forties, fifties, sixties. We needed to understand what Malcolm’s options were so we could probe the choices he would make. We needed to get to know his family, his role models, his disciples, his enemies. We needed to know—and this was crucial given the looming shadow of his autobiography—when he was lying about himself, and why. What Manning knew from his years of immersion, and what he proved in his book, was that Malcolm was not just a foot soldier or a fire breather (though he was both at times), he was an agent of change. The record of the facts of Malcolm’s life was necessary but not sufficient; the “why it matters” was delivered by Manning’s explanation of what Malcolm changed and how he changed himself. A self-educated man with a thirsty brain and a huge heart, Malcolm embraced a faith and then had the courage to sever himself from its leader when its principles no longer made sense to him, pragmatically or spiritually. He began his political life counseling withdrawal from white society and at the end spent every day urging action and engagement. In the end, he proved to be a profoundly American figure in his utter belief that we could in fact remake our society.

The other great challenge, or opportunity, in a book like this, which occupies a pivotal era in history, is to re-create the context around the subject. Once again, how an author chooses to accomplish this will depend largely on what reader he’s writing for. In the case of Malcolm X, we wanted to make sure that young readers and students in the twenty-first century really understood Malcolm’s world, and we had to make choices about what we could assume or not. A typical younger white reader probably knows who Martin Luther King Jr. was but might not understand who Marcus Garvey was, or Frantz Fanon, or what the Los Angeles riots were, or why zoot suits were important. All this history fed into Malcolm’s life, and would feed into the narrative of the book. In that way, my interests as someone who edits history as much as biography slide into each other.

Biography almost always means rebuilding an era, in both its light and dark sides, as with a biography of the great newspaper columnist Mary McGrory that I published in 2015. McGrory came of age in the early 1950s, when women in newspaper offices were expected to carry the coffee, not cover the president. I was surprised by how many of my younger colleagues found this eye opening. But I knew not to take for granted that the reader would know who Adlai Stevenson was. We had the blessing of a vivid writer to quote and hoped to demonstrate not just what a pathbreaker McGrory was for women but how she affected the way news was covered and commented on through her career, and how far we’ve fallen from so many of her high standards.

I often look at biographies also as a chance to teach—and not necessarily the expected inspirational lesson. With Malcolm X, I wanted to remind people of the physical courage men and women in the civil rights movement displayed. It’s always alarming to me how ephemeral the experience within history is, how the drama of a life is quickly reduced to dates and facts; the human anguish and other emotions are boiled out of it. A lot of my focus, and that of my associate editor, Kevin Doughten, who worked intensely on the manuscript with Manning and me for over a year, was to make sure that the human Malcolm could be seen behind the icon.

All of this leads, of course, to one of the thornier patches a biographer must cross: what do you know, what can you impute, what must you imagine? Here my rules are clear and immutable. The author’s evidence is going to assemble into several distinct piles: the facts she can document, the assumptions she can rationally make or presume, the inferences she can create from context, and the vast tower of everything else, including unrecorded events, emotions, thoughts, motives—all crucial building blocks to a biography, but not all to be used with equal abandon. She is free to draw from all piles but must let the reader know why she knows or thinks what she claims. Sometimes this can be gracefully accomplished in the text itself (“no one knows what was said behind that door, but Napoleon emerged smiling from the room”; “her boots would have been gleaming in the light of the full moon that night”); in other cases a source can be cited in the back matter. We may quote a conversation where there’s a reliable witness, but we ought to resist the urge to put words, and thoughts, in mouths where the record is silent.

Sources are the biographer’s salvation, but they can be treacherous. In Fallen Founder, the biography of Aaron Burr I published in 2007, Nancy Isenberg faced the double hazard that a lot of Burr’s personal papers were lost at sea and that the most voluminous documentation of his life was by his contemporary enemies. I likened it to the task of a biographer trying to write the life of Bill Clinton if the only record of his deeds were the Congressional Record from the time of his impeachment hearings.

Manning Marable’s book in fact began with a question about a source—Malcolm’s famous Autobiography, largely written by journalist Alex Haley, which Manning taught as a key text in a course on the history of African American political thought. But the more he examined it, and the more he tried to match it up to the facts and contours of what he was learning about Malcolm’s life, the more questions he had about the integrity of that remarkable book as a reliable record of a life. Thus he had embarked on two decades of research, compelled by his fundamental belief that this life, this man, held the key to understanding some fundamental, if dark, truths about America.

This was a case where the primary memoir source had been relied upon for decades, but turned out not to be a good map for the real life. The Autobiography of Malcolm X remains one of the most extraordinary documents in American political literature, but now we can read it for what it reveals and disguises.

There is no magic rule for relying on memoirs or diaries any more than there is for any primary source, other than the author’s own expertise and common sense—sometimes supplemented by the editor’s. Given the controversies over the “artful” construction of memoir today, it is surprising to me how long it has taken so many biographers to question the veracity of their subject’s own memoirs, when clung to as a source. I tell biographers, “Believe—but if you can, get a second source. If something smells like it’s been cooked, it probably has been. You are the one who knows the material best, and yours is the opinion I’ll rely on.” The commotion these days over fictionalized memoirs reminds me of a blunt phrase my family applied to a clever uncle of mine: “He never let the truth stand in the way of a good story.” I look for a biographer to parse fact from fiction and to signal when we’re on dodgy territory or at the mercy of an unreliable witness.

The solution, of course, cannot be to litter a book with “might have” and “we could speculate.” The author’s research is the scaffolding, and the task in editing a well-researched, thoroughly documented life is to know what should remain in sight and what should get moved into the back or banished completely. That applies to both details and events, to the author’s background research, and to her observations and conclusions. She should be confident in writing what she knows to be true, but be ready to explain to a skeptic (though not necessarily in the text itself) why she knows it. I encourage authors not to break the frame of their subject’s time period, if possible—in other words, not to make direct reference to sources or to secondary accounts or modern books, if possible, in the text itself. She should present her narrative, her interpretation, and argue with her rivals in the back of the book.

The temptation for authors to load a book down with everything they know is huge. I urge them, Resist! Resist at all costs. There are long periods in any life which can be summed up as, essentially, “more of the same.” The editor must stiffen the author’s spine: more is not better, and showing off that you know what color dress the general’s wife wore to the victory celebration is probably unnecessary. The vogue these days is certainly to go long, but I have to ask if we really needed—as we got in a recent writer’s biography—752 pages recounting the life of a someone whose own work was always scrupulously spare and whose books rarely exceeded 300 pages. Scrutinize every detail, every anecdote, and ask, Does this contribute to the interpretation of this life? Does it matter, really?

Too many biographies in recent years have ballooned into bloated, soggy messes of undifferentiated facts stuffed into a narrative. I suspect it’s the product of a number of factors—the depth of research that can be done from one’s own desk, the ease of access to documentation and primary sources that the internet allows (if writers were transcribing all those quotes by hand instead of just cutting and pasting, there’d be a lot fewer of them), and even the quickness of typing on a computer and seeing a manuscript unfold only one screen at a time, instead of pounding away and watching it pile up page by page. Back in the typewriter age, physical labor kept books shorter.

I have over my desk a little typed quote given to me by one of my authors (I’ve never tracked its source, though he claimed it was Leslie Stephen): “Consider your reader’s brevity of life.” Over the years there have been any number of famous (and famously long) multivolume biographies, and almost all of them began as one-volume lives that billowed out of control. A biography should not become like Borges’s map, the same size as the empire it depicted, and a biographer shouldn’t let his subject’s life take over his own.


My guiding principle for documentation inside the book is this: I want to know where the author got his stuff. In general, I don’t actually care if he tags each quote with an archive box number; I’m content with a detailed essay on sourcing at the back that tells me that the letters of Andrew Jackson are in this library, that everything he tells us about how they built a redoubt in eighteenth-century Boston came from that book, that all those quotes about the Watergate hearings are from the author’s interviews unless otherwise noted. Many authors now post their more detailed sources online, but as a reader, I’d still like the summary in the back of the book itself. More scholarly books demand, and many of my authors who are academics still prefer, the detailed quote-by-quote numbered endnotes. I weigh what kind of book it is, what we think the reader will most benefit from (a hundred extra pages of notes will drive up the book’s cover price), and come to some mutual understanding.

In books that take on controversial subjects, and especially books about people who are still alive (and therefore can sue for libel), there is also the important distinction between what the author knows and what he can prove. If there are issues of libel or invasion of privacy—the great specters of publishing law (along with plagiarism)—my authors and I work closely with attorneys in our company whose expertise is navigating these gray zones. My experience has been that publishing lawyers are in the business not of forcing authors to say as little as possible but of allowing them to say as much as possible. I have actually heard an attorney say, when I explained that we simply could not get written permission for a quote from a particularly essential letter, “Let ’em sue.” At the same time, no publishing firm or author should be cavalier about the accuracy or ethics of what they publish, and a good editor flags potential problems before legal counsel is required.

Not all biographies rescue lost or forgotten heroes, even when that was the original intent. Authors may have to make hard choices when they find out things that are unpleasant or unappetizing, or if they challenge the shining image of icons, or reveal unsavory facts about deeds or misdeeds. Maybe the biographer finds out her subject was a coward, or an addict, or a plagiarist. She must be prepared and be honest. If the problematic facts are material to the story, she has to be scrupulous. Maybe the families that gave access to their beloved ancestor’s papers will be horrified to discover marital infidelity or substance abuse in the book. The biographer has to decide if it’s crucial to her argument to include such facts or if it’s just lurid detail. There are no hard-and-fast rules here other than the author’s own moral compass and common sense. That said, it helps to have a clear arrangement for the use of any archive, public or private, before diving into it.

There will always be readers (and critics) who will howl if you tear down their long-held images. In the case of Malcolm X, what I call “the Malcolm Faithful” went nuts over a few lines about events in a difficult time in his younger days and about Marable’s interpretation of Malcolm’s political trajectory. I firmly believe we actually presented a Malcolm who was more heroic than the myth, because he was more human.

Also, I don’t want to find out in the last stages of editing a manuscript that a widow has the right of review for her husband’s biography or that an archive won’t permit letters to be quoted in part, only as a whole. An author should be honest and take advice from his editor early on about legal guidelines and permissions and talk through any squirmy issues that arise in the process.

Because of the obvious risks, I’ve always been wary of publishing biographies of living subjects, especially ones in which the subject offers “cooperation.” (Also, I like to know how the story ends . . .) Obviously, many editors are less cowardly. Sometimes it works out fine—the subject opens doors for the writer, participates in interviews, offers access to papers, has no right of review, and agrees to go on NPR with the author. Too many times, however, especially with a celebrity subject, you get miles down the road when suddenly a lawyer, manager, or publicist gets wind of what’s going on and there’s hell to pay. If a writer is basing his book on cooperation, it’s critical he get the deal spelled out in writing up front or, at worst, fully disclose to his editor the project is a gamble.

Clearly the legal hazards of writing about the living are greater, and therefore one’s sensitivities must be greater too—the dead can’t sue for libel (though their families can for invasion of privacy, and copyright to unpublished documents survives their writer’s death). Again, forewarned about the law is forearmed; it’s a tricky area, and no one wants ugly surprises.


So what about memoir, a noble genre which has lately come under such fire? There the issue of what is truth can be murkier. Memory can be highly unreliable. The more scrupulous memoirists actually fact-check themselves, consulting other sources to make sure their memories are accurate (and sometimes finding useful details to supplement their recollections).

Beside the matter of factual accuracy, there is the matter of emotional honesty. What sets some memoirs apart is that the author turns a really unsparing gaze on him- or herself, connecting with readers by exposing feelings we might all have shared even if they are ugly or shameful. I’ve sometimes found even very thoughtful and articulate writers resist this, or don’t push themselves to dig beneath their own surface that way. Again, not every memoir has to be a searing self-exposé, but many writers need to be pushed to take their introspection beyond the level where they’re first inclined to settle.

And there are inevitably conflicting memories, as I find every time I try to reconstruct some simple event from my own family history. Each memoirist has choices about what to believe and what to present, and must set her own tone and her own rules. I ask only that she be honest with the reader about the choices she has made.

Also in memoir, the author may well be close to squeamish about exposing or offending other people and may elide events or pull punches because “old so-and-so is still alive.” That problem exists in biography too but is obviously more acute when the writer is also at the center of the story.

In my mind, though, in the end, it’s pretty simple. The author knows what’s a fact and what’s made up, or improved, or embroidered; she knows when characters are real and when they’ve morphed into something more convenient. She knows when things happened and in what order. If she wants to rearrange the facts to get to the “truth,” okay. But she has to tell her reader that’s what she’s doing. If this is how she remembers it and we know others disagree, fine. She can say so up front, in an author’s note. I’m uncompromising on this subject. If she’s not comfortable with that, if she think it’s too restraining to her art, fine. She can write a novel.


Any author–editor relationship is based on trust. I trust that an author is representing the facts, knows what he’s talking about, and has done his job. He is the author, his name is on the book, and it’s his expertise that I’ve relied on, his knowledge of the subject, his honesty in approach, his doggedness in the endeavor. For his part, the author trusts me to read, counsel, advise, offer a smart opinion, help sort out the important from the detritus, highlight the foreground and push the rest into the background. He may have come to know his subject too well, and I’m here to bring him back into the real world.

A close colleague and accomplished editor, Tom Engelhardt, was once asked in an interview, “Publishing is a business, but editing is a profession, one might also say an art. What does an editor do?” He answered, “All fine writers lay down a path for you, the editor. All you have to do is find it in the verbal undergrowth, set foot upon it, and then it’s all remarkably simple. You’re doing your best to slip inside another mind and help unknot the words and thoughts that stood between a writer and the book he or she imagined.”

The task of the biographer is related. A life unfolds before her, but she has to find the most graceful footing through it. She has a responsibility to the life she is observing, to present it accurately but appropriately, but she has an obligation to the reader as well. There is a broad spectrum from satisfying to inclusive to comprehensive to exhaustive to exhausting. Wherever the author chooses to land, and for whatever audience she’s writing, the most important thing is that she knows why that life mattered. The task of the editor is to make sure her readers know that, too.





19


OF MONOGRAPHS AND MAGNUM OPUSES


EDITING WORKS OF SCHOLARSHIP


SUSAN FERBER*

First, do no harm.

While it may seem strange to apply a well-known motto of medicine to the realm of publishing, it seems to me the first and foremost responsibility of an editor is to not inflict damage while improving the health of a body of scholarly writing. The scholarly book editor is akin to a medical subspecialist: she focuses on acquiring titles within a discipline that is a niche within the larger scholarly community—not simply fiction or nonfiction but typically an area of scholarship mastered by a relatively small portion of the global population. Authors she meets are therefore highly trained professionals who have spent decades in preparation for a given book, often delving so deeply into their particular subjects that they have become less and less able to speak to others about it. The editor thus must think about how to best present this material to a broader yet still primarily academic audience and to respect the specialized nature of advanced scholarship. Overly simplifying, or “dumbing down,” the author’s text may ultimately result in alienating its core audience without realistically replacing it with a wider one. And so not harming that piece of work, esoteric as it may be, must be the first goal.


Very few people enter the world of publishing with the goal of working on scholarly books. The job perks of academic editors do not include swanky book parties filled with well-known writers whose work appears in mainstream literary magazines. The books they edit are not the ones found in airport bookstores or on best-seller lists. The lists they manage can be quite large—several dozen to a hundred a year, perhaps. Relatively few editors are primarily educated in the disciplines in which they publish—there are simply not enough literature lists for every English major in scholarly publishing. More common is for a scholarly acquisitions editor to learn to acquire in a discipline, with its own jargon, its own trending issues, and its own celebrity authors who are known only in these niche communities; there is often minimal crossover to scholars in other fields, let alone readers outside of the academy.

So why do scholarly editors do what they do? At least for me, the chief satisfaction comes in the editing process itself. I believe that each project adds unique knowledge to the world, and intellectually engaging with that work is what helps me to translate an author’s scholarly contribution to a wider audience, consisting of at least his peer group. Most authors tend not to think about their manuscripts first and foremost as stylish, engaging, accessible pieces of prose. Helping them to step back from their research, to prevent scholarly detail and the findings of other academics from overwhelming their voice, and to produce a work of a reasonable length for the intended audience occupies my evenings and weekends. The ability to diagnose what a manuscript needs comes with experience, but each project has its own unique challenges, and it is impossible to apply a one-size-fits-all approach.

For many academic editors, manuscript development is a secondary, or even unwritten, part of the job description. We are typically assessed on quantitative goals, such as signings and sales; “quality” is a difficult output to measure. Critical acclaim or book prizes may serve as a proxy metric, and most of us believe a well-crafted book will outsell a mediocre one. But how much better can a book be made by editing, and what percentage increase in sales will result? These effects are unquantifiable. And in each discipline, even for different types of books, the answers may significantly differ. If a book on, say, criminology has a lyrical voice, will that alter its eventual sales or reception? Some topics simply do not have a large audience. There is more opportunity for American history titles to find a crossover audience than, for example, those on literary theory or linguistics or biochemistry. The broader public buys more books on Lincoln and Kennedy than on molecules or modalities. And frankly there is not time in a scholarly editor’s schedule, given the sizes of lists and all the other tasks involved in publishing, to engage in detailed developmental work for every book equally, or even all books on her list. So the editor must decide what kind of editorial intervention is necessary—or possible—within the constraints of her own list and workflow. Giving broad-based advice to authors about introductions may be all that is feasible; in some cases, author and editor may be mainly relying on the feedback from the peer readers’ reports or advice from a series editor.

It helps to parse types of scholarly works in terms of what kind of editing might be most beneficial for them. There are traditional monographs, by which I mean very narrow, highly detailed, and thoroughly researched studies intended only for a specialist audience. The aforementioned “crossover” books are not necessarily any less thoroughly researched, but their topics are part of a more public conversation outside of academe, be that in the professional world, a niche audience (such as yogis or birders or Civil War buffs), or a general-interest audience, perhaps because of current events (such as al Qaeda after 9/11, Ukraine after the Orange Revolution, or Gulf Coast flooding after Hurricane Katrina). A book may also be classified as crossover because of the author’s platform, particularly if she is a known figure in the media or has written other works that have given her name recognition beyond a discrete scholarly circle. As these books seek to reach a wider and less expert audience, they may repay (and demand) a greater investment of editorial time to make them accessible to those readers.

Assessing the role of a given book in an author’s career also helps determine the type of editing that is appropriate for the text. If the author has, by choice or by circumstance, decided to leave academe or is not aiming for tenure-track employment, then he may be open to editorial suggestions that a tenure-track assistant professor in a conservative, heavyweight research university may not be. This can manifest itself in numerous ways, starting with the title. One author insisted to me that a book with a “How” or “Why” phrase in its subtitle would never be acceptable to colleagues in his elite department, while others have felt that titles suggested by the publisher might sell the book but raise the eyebrows of academic readers for being too broad and overhyping the contents.

First-time authors with a strong dissertation in hand who are staying on an academic path may wisely deem their key audience to be peers in their specialist field, the very individuals who will likely be asked to write letters about their corpus of work for their tenure files. They may be thinking primarily about establishing their scholarly credentials in the eyes of their department. Their books may have a core audience of scores or a couple of hundred readers, in which case an editor might be less likely to invest the publisher’s resources or her own finite hours in significant editing of their manuscripts.

At the opposite end of the spectrum, I have worked with authors who think of themselves as writers first. They care most about the narrative quality of their work and only secondarily about engaging explicitly with the scholarly literature. Often it is tenure that gives such authors more freedom to speak expansively and permits them to pursue a desire to reach a wider audience. So an accurate sense of where a project fits into an author’s career arc, how the manuscript fits into an author’s self-identity as a writer, and what her goals are for the work is critical before I engage with the text. This is not to say that any work can be turned into one for a larger audience; there are topics that are necessarily far more limited in reach, no matter how accessible the writing is. Nonetheless, that a book is scholarly is no reason for it to be badly written, unreadable, or beyond improvement.

At a bare minimum, most scholarly manuscripts I encounter benefit tremendously from a fairly substantial revision of their introduction. It is in these opening pages that the author is most obviously working out how to position the project amidst the mountains of surrounding literature, often coming to the point of the book toward the end rather than beginning with a statement of its argument. My recommendation is most often to simply excise the existing introduction and begin writing from scratch. The quotes and citations can be added in, but writing free form, rather than getting distracted by tracked changes and the ways that the project has long been framed, can liberate an author to express compellingly what the work is meant to do and what its contribution is.

Like Goldilocks, writers need to find the introduction voice and length that feel just right. Many introductions present perfunctory information and demonstrate all too clearly that an author has hurriedly written up something to put at the beginning of a manuscript after devoting virtually all his energy to the rest of the chapters. Other introductions—and not only by first-time authors—are extremely long and wind tediously through the dreaded “literature review” before finally discussing the contribution of the present work (often in the form of an equally excessive road map to the contents of each chapter). In these and other cases, authors can often forget that readers need to be captivated and guided into a subject that they, unlike the authors, have not spent years working on. The best way to start may be a case history of a key figure in the work, or a telling anecdote, or an ethnographic description, or a big question that the author has set out to answer.


Rather than generalize about the other parts of scholarly manuscripts that most frequently need editorial attention—such as transitions, the webbing between chapters, and overlong notes—I will illustrate the diagnostic challenges and treatments of a few types of projects using examples from my own discipline, history. Once a book has been published with extensive revisions, there is no way to quantify how it would have performed if left largely unedited. But I have selected these projects to discuss because on publication they achieved recognition for the quality of their writing.

Microhistory is a particular genre whose popularity has ebbed and flowed, but that has attracted many a scholar who has discovered a story in an archive while working on a broad study and found that following an individual or small subject has been more fascinating. Oftentimes microhistories can revolve around a compelling event, such as a courtroom trial, an urban crisis, or another revealing episode, and their organization can appear to flow naturally from the research. I have edited several such works: they are tremendous reconstructions of what happened, and figuring out where the stories begin and end is one of the key challenges the authors faced. So too is piecing together the lives of the people who intersected in these events, which is especially difficult if they never became household names and appear in the historical record only fleetingly.

While the scholarly excavation involved in the research for such books is no less deep and intense than for many a monograph, these works may have a more limited time frame and scope. Editorial intervention can be valuable in helping the author figure out where the chapter breaks should fall, whose perspective(s) should come to the fore in different parts of the story, and how to connect the narrative with larger interpretive questions. What larger understandings of the period and the field these microhistories can speak to is central to what audiences the book can reach.

A story that is intriguing to the author, even one in which she has invested years of wide-ranging research, does not in itself make the book worthwhile, readable, or, frankly, necessary. When scholars undertake these works, the results may be quite different from what happens when writers or journalists with a nose for a good story dive into them. Nonscholarly writers often spend a good deal of time thinking about plot, pacing, setting, character description, and other elements of narrative for which a scholar may have less-developed writing muscles. Academic historians, if they wish to be praised for their scholarly contributions, must convey longer-term meanings and larger relevance for their narratives, while highlighting what makes their interpretation orginal. But this imperative can be in tension with the effort to attract nonspecialist readers or students.

There’s a second type of book I’ll simply dub the magnum opus, the work whose scope and ambition make it a capstone to a scholarly career. The magnum opus is a species familiar to editors in every discipline, and it comes with its own challenges. First, there is the issue of length. When an author who has signed a contract on proposal delivers years—or decades—later a manuscript four to five times the contracted length, it usually signals that my job as an editor is going to be of a different order. Not only is the actual editing work much more time consuming, but so too is convincing publishing colleagues that the sales and market expectations and publishing plans for the book deserve to change. It becomes even more incumbent on editor and author to ensure that the depth and scope of the study live up to the promise of the work and that there is no unnecessary fat in the manuscript.

Frequently in these long-gestating tomes, the introduction sets out an ambitious argument but the chapters themselves have become overgrown with examples and the chronological or thematic scope of the work overall has expanded well beyond what was initially planned. The narrative threads may be strong at the granular level but not connected to the interpretive argument driving the overall work. Finding narrative momentum both within and between individual chapters and adding signposts through the work are essential to making the “big book” work. Editing this type of manuscript cannot involve a slash-and-burn approach but requires very close line-to-line microsurgery. Recognizing that each archival detail has been hard won means making careful choices about which are most colorful, which best support the author’s point, and which are not essential, no matter how intriguing.

One of my authors referred to this editing as putting his manuscript on a Jenny Craig diet. It is often much easier for an editor to see that a manuscript needs this reduction in order to become a stronger, healthier version of itself than for the author who has invested so many years of work and writing in it. The magnum opus often requires a particularly challenging editorial letter: praising the author’s mastery of the topic and respecting the enormous amount of work that the research and writing have entailed, while at the same time insisting on surgical intervention before a work can be published.

It is somewhat unpredictable how long a work the market can bear. A definitive work is often by necessity long—but how long is too long for its intended readership? Given that manuscript length directly correlates to production and manufacturing costs, does cutting by 20 percent suffice to attain a feasible length, or is more pruning needed? Will the core audience of scholars feel that some of the muscle of the project has been damaged by this editing? The answer, again, must be determined case by case, factoring in the publisher’s best guess as to the size of the market, the editor’s stamina, and the author’s willingness to “kill her darlings.” The latter is unpredictable, because for each author this is her lifetime of work. She may argue that her eminent colleagues say that the book cannot be cut. Or that it can be published in two volumes. Or that some other editor knows better.


The editing process can take months or sometimes longer, depending on the degree of revision and the author’s workload of teaching and other responsibilities. It may also be prolonged by peer review, which is discussed elsewhere in this collection, though procedures for this vary so widely from one press or even one project to another that it’s hard to generalize. Some projects are reviewed as early drafts or even proposals, and the feedback may help guide the editing; in other presses or other situations (perhaps when the original manuscript has been heavily revised), peer review may occur after editing.

Once the one-on-one work of manuscript revision is complete, the collaborative process between author and editor shifts to focus on other elements of the book and expands to include others in-house as the manuscript enters the publishing pipeline. It may, for example, entail walking an author through how to acquire art or prepare tables and graphs that the production department can work with, an area that may not be his forte. Scholarly publishers do not have staffs to prepare and handle these details for authors, nor are they (generally) able to pay permission costs. Scholarly book budgets are close to the bone and cannot cover what may be routine expenses for a college textbook publisher, such as specialized cartography or outside developmental editing.

Working with the author and with marketing to plan for publication also begins long before the book goes to production—in fact, at the moment of acquisition. Indeed, the author’s input and active involvement are essential to tapping into the networks of specialists she is a part of. Thinking about general audiences and mainstream review publications is of much less use than identifying how to reach niche audiences. Indeed, it is perhaps a golden age for promoting books to niche academic audiences, given the print publications, blogs, specialized societies, Twitter feeds, social media outlets, and other networks that exist to bring together far-flung individuals with esoteric interests.

Unless this groundwork is laid, the moment of publication can often seem like a letdown for a scholarly author who has often spent many years of a career preparing to write this work. It can take a few years for a print review to appear in the flagship academic journal in the field; it may be fiscally impossible for the publisher to advertise as widely as an author would like—say, via a solo ad in the New York Review of Books. The sales numbers may take considerable time to build, given the buying patterns of libraries and wholesalers, let alone individual buyers. These are not books bought in large quantity on spec by bookstores—but neither do they have the subsequent mass returns that commercial titles often suffer. They are also not books that are only “for the moment.” Often the product of many years of research, they can have a long tail, finding interested readers years after initial publication.

How scholarly manuscripts are selected and become finished books is a process one of my authors has compared to the mysteries of the Ouija board. In my experience, it is not hidden spirits guiding the hand of the editor but a number of specialists all coming together—the author as scholarly expert, the editor, other academics as peer reviewers, and numerous publishing professionals with different areas of expertise—to make accessible and lasting, in print and in pixels, a body of specialized knowledge that others can in turn build on to create new scholarship. But between the initial selection of a work for the list and the book’s debut in the world, the editor’s diagnosis and treatment of the text’s weaknesses represent a quiet, even intimate way in which she helps create a fitter and more enduring version of the book.





20


RELIABLE SOURCES


REFERENCE EDITING AND PUBLISHING


ANNE SAVARESE*

In the early decades of the twenty-first century the notion of editing or even using reference books might sound quaint, if not anachronistic. Do people still need those things anymore? Doesn’t everyone just look everything up online?

Reference is an elastic term in publishing. In its most generic sense it refers to books and digital products (databases, apps, e-books), often multiauthored, that have a practical purpose—dictionaries, encyclopedias, companions, atlases, guidebooks, and other sources in which you can look up useful information. Students might consult a reference work as a first stop in a research project; instructors or scholars might consult one to learn about a subject outside their specialty or for a quick refresher on a topic they are teaching. Broadly defined, reference includes books like the one you’re reading now.

Reference publishing started moving into digital formats in the 1990s, much earlier than most other publishing categories, and with good reason. Reference works are particularly well suited to digital platforms. The information they provide is what people in the field call “granular”: part of a well-designed whole but organized in stand-alone units, such as encyclopedia entries or dictionary definitions. Content is a word that reference publishers use more frequently than book, because the product is not format specific. Content is the material, the information, the knowledge that readers want. The editor’s job is to make sure that content—whether in print or digital form—is as authoritative and useful as possible.

In digital form, reference works can be updated and expanded quickly compared to the time it takes to produce a printed book, though significant revisions and additions generally need to go through an editorial process similar to that of existing content. A collection of reference works can be cross-indexed, allowing users to search across sources. The content is not static: it can develop over time, as with such crowd-sourced projects as Wikipedia or such scholarly works as the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. The digital format allows for greater flexibility in length and number of illustrations, and can include links to primary sources, video clips, and related material. Electronic resources also don’t take up shelf space as multivolume print encyclopedias do, and they allow remote access: the user does not have to be in the library to use them. Some well-known reference works that began as books now have print and digital versions, such as The Chicago Manual of Style; some have become primarily digital resources, such as the Oxford Classical Dictionary. But while digital publishing has many advantages, cost is not necessarily one of them, particularly when the original creation of a digital version is accounted for. Most publishers do need to charge subscription or other fees for such works to recoup the costs of developing and maintaining them.

In bookstores, the trade reference category doesn’t exist in the way it did twenty years ago: the reference section of stores and online vendors usually includes an assortment of language dictionaries, study guides for standardized tests, quotation books, and collections of unusual words or fun facts.

That said, a variety of print reference is still out there and still can sell successfully, but not in the general, catch-all “reference” section. A historical atlas, for example, will be shelved with other books on history. The Princeton Companion to Mathematics is shelved with other books on math.

Something similar has happened to print reference in libraries. Many public and academic libraries have reduced or phased out their print reference collections. It’s not that the material is no longer necessary but instead that the same book, or an updated version, is available as part of the library’s digital collection, so the reference room or section of the library has become less central.

Search engines and online databases have greatly reduced the demand for books that simply collect basic facts. To attract an audience, contemporary reference works must provide much more: context, analysis, bibliographies, or collections of data otherwise not easy to find with a few clicks.

As a result, the number of publishers that produce traditional reference works has declined, particularly among trade presses: these days, reference is the domain of commercial academic or reference publishers and university presses. But even if relatively few people in contemporary publishing will be full-time reference editors, a larger number will have an opportunity to develop reference content. University press editors, for example, might commission the occasional reference work to complement a list of monographs, textbooks, and general-interest works. Knowing some basic details about the editing of reference works can save a good deal of time and effort—and can make the work as useful as possible for its intended audience.





ACQUISITION


Most reference works originate with the publisher: the acquiring editor researches and develops the idea, then commissions authors or volume editors, usually scholars, to carry it out. Occasionally an author or institution develops a reference proposal and submits it to publishers, but this is more common for practical, how-to reference books than for large-scale projects.

The acquiring, or commissioning, editor must consider how the work would serve readers and how it would complement the publisher’s list as a whole. Is there a need for a new reference work on this subject? What would make it distinctive? Is the subject sufficiently broad? Is it widely taught at the university or secondary level? What is the potential size of the audience that is likely to find the work indispensable? If it is a one-volume print reference book, will it appeal to scholars or students, or both, as well as to libraries and other institutions? Will it take a comprehensive or selective approach? Does the content lend itself to more than one use, in spinoff volumes, databases, or apps? Even single-volume reference works can generate spinoffs: for example, Harvard University Press published Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide in 2004 and later collected some of the major entries from that volume into a paperback, Ancient Religions, suitable for course use.

Reference editors should be aware of competing reference works from other publishers, as well as what kind of work makes sense for a press of their size. Because most reference works take significant time and resources to develop, a new reference project should be unique and authoritative—essentially, a must-have for some clearly defined group of readers.

As part of their research, reference editors often consult with scholars or librarians to try out ideas or solicit reactions to proposals. Some reference publishers have permanent advisory boards of librarians; others assemble a group of advisers to consult on a specific project. It’s customary to pay these advisers an honorarium in return for their comments.

Before approaching potential volume editors, it’s wise to sketch out a preliminary budget and try to anticipate the questions from potential editors and contributors. The clearer you can be about the intended length, format, timeline, price, and sales potential, the easier it will be for editors and contributors to understand their roles in the project.

Reference budgets typically include an advance for the volume editor; fees for the associate or section editors and advisers; fees, free books, or both for the contributors, and the cost of professional proofreading and indexing, as well as funds to acquire or redraw illustrations or maps. Sometimes major reference works, such as those with a heavy or complex illustration program or a multimedia digital component, require subventions to cover the costs. In some cases volume editors are able to secure funding through their institutions; in others, the publisher applies for a grant.





CHOOSING THE TEAM


Major reference works are complex to plan and develop. A typical encyclopedia might have an editor in chief and several associate or section editors; contributors, who can number in the dozens or the hundreds; a corresponding number of articles, ranging from a few hundred to ten thousand words each, depending on the project; and often a group of advisers as well.

No matter how strong the subject of a reference work, the right author or editor is one of the keys to its success. The ideal editor, or editorial team, should have outstanding credentials and contacts in the field, as well as the interest and vision to lead a project that will take considerable time and energy to complete. You’ll know when you’ve found the right people if they understand the idea right away and offer thoughts that refine the idea and make it stronger.

If the appropriate volume editor for your project is a university professor, look for someone with tenure and sufficient seniority. Midcareer and senior scholars will have broad knowledge of the field and a network of colleagues and former students they can call on to contribute. Their personal relationships as well as their professional standing will encourage others to contribute to the volume. The volume editor should want to take an active role in planning the project; this will result in a much stronger project than you would get under someone who plans to serve only as a figurehead, no matter how well known.

Most scholars who agree to edit a reference work have never done so before, and some might be wary about the amount of work involved. It’s important for you, as the acquiring editor, to explain the steps, as well as the support—administrative as well as editorial—that the publisher intends to provide. Discuss the division of labor and who will be responsible for what, from making the initial contact with prospective contributors to reviewing the proofs.

Few people agree to edit a major reference work for the money, which usually is modest and paid out over time: the motivation is more likely the opportunity to create a valuable resource for students and colleagues or to make a mark on the field. If the volume editors are confident that their publisher shares their vision and will offer guidance and support at each stage, they are more likely to sign on and to persuade others to contribute to the project.

Reference contracts for multiauthor reference works developed and commissioned by the publisher usually are works for hire: the publisher owns the copyright. Each contribution is part of a collective work, and this arrangement allows the publisher the ability to license, revise, and repurpose the material over the life of the work, which could be decades long. Reference contracts for volume editors also typically include a list of the editors’ specific responsibilities and contain delivery and payout stages in order to keep the project on schedule.





DEVELOPMENT


Once a reference project is under contract, you’ll need to work with the volume editor to develop a table of contents or list of entries (sometimes called a headword list). If the project will involve an editorial team and many contributors, schedule a planning meeting with the editors, including advisers if you have them, to plan the scope of the project, flesh out the scope of the planned entries, suggest contributors for those entries, and iron out how the process of assigning articles, setting deadlines, sending reminders, and so on will work. Gathering everyone in the same room for a day or two allows the editors to get to know one another and generate ideas. By the end of the planning meeting, everyone should have a strong sense of personal investment in the project and a commitment to the collective mission.

Before you start to invite contributors, it’s helpful to develop contributor guidelines that include a description of the project, the planned contents, style and format points, submission instructions, schedule, and sample entries or articles. Post the guidelines on a web page and give contributors access. The more detailed the guidelines, the easier the editorial process will be: even if contributors don’t follow the instructions, the guidelines will make the copyeditor’s and proofreader’s job easier.

Once the articles have started to come in and the volume editors have approved the content, developmental editing can make the difference between a coherent, consistent reference work and a hodgepodge of articles written for seemingly different audiences. This level of editing is not always something that you, as an acquiring editor, will have time to do yourself. Whether you will delegate to a development editor or packager, work with a hands-on team of volume editors, or manage the process yourself, a strong editorial eye on the entire project is crucial.

Even if you will not be the one to edit the majority of the entries, spend some time editing the sample entries, along with the contributor guidelines, and request sample editing from the development editor or packager so that you and the volume editors can review it carefully. Accessibility and clarity are essential. Unless you’re preparing a highly specialized, technical reference work for professionals, a reference work for adults should speak to the “educated nonspecialist”—generally, upper-level undergraduates and beyond. Some entries might be more technical than others, but the writing level should remain consistent, even for the entries on more sophisticated concepts. Put yourself in the user’s shoes and query anything you don’t understand. The preface or introduction should articulate clearly the scope of the book, how it is organized, and how the editors expect readers to use it. Consider that reviewers will read this, even if many readers skip it, and make sure the work delivers what it promises.

Make sure you have a clear plan for the day-to-day management of the project as well. Reference works require heavy correspondence, the preparation and trafficking of contracts and articles, careful recordkeeping (with the help of a shared spreadsheet or database, depending on the complexity of the project), and attention to the schedule and budget. As the acquiring editor you know the project best and have the greatest stake in it. Contributors tend to be overcommitted, and a reference article can fall to the bottom of their to-do list, especially if the deadline is a few months off. Make sure they receive regular reminders that request a response, so that if a contributor goes quiet you can investigate further. Allow plenty time for revision and for chasing or reassigning articles that run late.





PRODUCTION


Reference works often are large, and it’s rare that the entire manuscript comes in at the same time: articles usually are assigned and delivered over a span of several months. Invariably some contributors deliver late, and some articles will need substantial revision; still others have to be reassigned. It is not unusual to begin the production process before the entire manuscript is in final form, so that you have batches of articles in progress at different stages: in draft form, in copyediting, and with the compositor. A digital project might edit and post articles in batches as they arrive or on a designated schedule.

Reference manuscripts are more time consuming to produce than conventional books not only because they tend to be longer but also because they’ve been written by a team of contributors. Expect to get involved in resolving questions related to style and content. The copyeditor, for example, might find inconsistencies both small (disagreement over the precise date of an event or the translation of a foreign term) and large (apparent contradictions in facts or analysis from entry to entry).





PUBLICATION


Reference books attract little traditional review coverage beyond trade publications such as Choice and Library Journal, and it can take several months for those reviews to appear. But if the project is unique, or unusual enough, it might encourage reviews or features in print media and notice on social media as well. The intriguing title and subject of the 2014 book Dictionary of Untranslatables, for example, helped attract publicity that ranged from a one-sentence review on a humor page in the New York Times Magazine to a substantive discussion in a New Yorker article on the challenges of translation. The fourth edition of The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (2012), a significant revision of a well-known resource by a new editorial team, inspired a “virtual roundtable” in which several poets responded creatively to individual entries for the online review Public Books.

You can help your colleagues in marketing, sales, and publicity by distilling your long immersion in the project into bullet points that will help them spread the word with enthusiasm. In addition to preparing a detailed table of contents, a list of contributors and their affiliations, and some sample material to use in promotion, think about the questions they are likely to have.

Who is the audience for the book? Reference books often serve a range of readers, but you should be able to identify who they are and why this book is for them.

What’s in it? How is it organized? List the reference features, including the number of articles and contributors and any other elements, such as bibliographies, appendices, an index (or more than one), topical list of entries, and other features that demonstrate the project’s ease of use.

Who is the author? If it’s a collectively written project, will the volume editor or members of the editorial team help promote the book by participating, for example, in panel discussions or interviews?

What’s the story behind the book? What makes it unique—is it, for example, an atlas of the ancient world more than ten years in the making; a dictionary of concepts essential to a particular discipline; the first guide to an emerging area of study; the most comprehensive or authoritative encyclopedia on the topic?

You might be asked to create sample material for a promotional website or to provide material—sample entries, interesting facts, etc.—suitable for social media. Encourage the volume editors and contributors to post about the work on their own social media accounts.





WHY REFERENCE?


Reference publishing continues to change, but certain characteristics of the category remain. Reference content synthesizes current knowledge about a subject. It provides a gateway to further research. It can help frame or define a broad subject, academic field, or emerging area of interest, and it can make scholarship or archival material accessible to a broad audience of students, scholars, and researchers.

Despite a common image of reference works as dry, dull, or antiquated, well-executed reference works are none of these things. The really good ones serve readers for years, even decades; the best are indispensable. And the best of the best are those that readers actually enjoy: they’re rewarding to browse. They make us feel smart. They contain plenty of well-organized information and analysis. They are balanced, covering topics in proportion to their importance; they tell us why the selected topics are important.

In return for the challenges that come with editing reference—among them the constant demands of managing each project and the long-term investment in building it, piece by piece, until it is greater than the sum of its parts—the reward is in the finished product. An enduring resource filled with reliable, well-written material, professionally organized and edited, serves readers in ways that endless search-engine results never will. In an ever-rising sea of information, reference editors offer readers a lifeline.





21


THE PINK SHOULD BE A SURPRISE


CREATING ILLUSTRATED BOOKS


DEB AARONSON*

Before I begin, you should know that I did not sign and return my contract for this essay in a timely fashion. I also missed the deadline for submitting the essay itself by well over a month. Illustrated books have their own special problems and rewards, but managing authors is a challenge you’ll have no matter what kind of books you work on. Getting a contract signed, and a deadline met, by your author is often no small feat.

There are other ways in which the publishing process is similar across all categories of books. This is an idea-driven industry, and a book always begins with an idea—whether it’s your own or one pitched to you by an author or agent. Then there’s the process of convincing your colleagues it’s a good one, followed by the task of making an offer and negotiating a contract for the book.

The tenor of the contract negotiation is often a strong indicator of how the project will unfold. If the negotiations are relatively easy (they are hardly ever truly easy), if you and the author can articulate and hear each other’s concerns and come up with practical compromises to manage your different needs, then the process of making the book itself will likely be a gratifying one. If you struggle with these things, if the author has difficulty putting minor points in perspective or trusting that you will stand by your word even though you can’t insert that promise into the contract, then chances are that dynamic will continue through the creative process. When you believe in an author’s work, you likely want to be a part of that person’s creative development over time and even after the book is finished, and you hope the inverse is true as well. In the ideal scenario, the trust that is built on the foundation of one book will result in collaborations to follow.

The beauty of making books is that the final result almost never hints at the wear and tear it took to get there. The pleasure of seeing the final result—seeing your idea transformed into a physical, tangible object—can’t be underestimated and is, especially in this digital age, universal. No matter how long I’ve worked in publishing, no matter how many books I’ve worked on, that feeling, thankfully, is a dependable reward.


While those dynamics are common across most categories of book publishing, there are plenty of ways in which creating illustrated books is strikingly different. When I was an editorial assistant in 2000, few houses published illustrated books apart from those who published them exclusively. Aside from cookbooks and children’s books, most trade houses invested limited resources in these kinds of projects and the staff to make them. The lack of interest in illustrated books from the big trade houses suggested that the commercial possibilities of these titles were limited. Only a select number of houses, a few of them university presses, focused on acquiring them, and fewer interested parties often meant smaller advances. As a result, there was little incentive for literary agents to represent illustrated projects and the authors who wrote them.

Editors had to be both creative and savvy, not just in developing ideas for books but in imagining how these ideas would take shape as objects and making decisions about how they’d look and feel. How big should the trim size be? How many pages is ideal? Should it be hardcover or paperback? Should it be slipcased? And how does all of this relate to the book’s potential audience, where they shop, and how much they are willing to spend?

Illustrated books are not defined by their subject matter but rather by the capacity of that subject matter to be expressed visually. That means that any idea that can be, literally, pictured is on the table for potential publication, and not just ideas related to traditional illustrated book subjects, such as art, photography, design, and architecture. I’ve published books about the history of punk music, the American Civil War, and a woman who dressed up her pet parakeets in tiny little outfits and photographed them against elaborately staged representations of historical events and domestic scenes. This is a good problem to have: the pool from which book ideas can be drawn is unlimited, but it is also mildly overwhelming.

Like many industries, publishing is built on relationships. Ideas and projects grow out of forging new and nurturing long-standing connections with people and organizations—museums, foundations, galleries, archives, and agents. Ideas for books have also come to me from (in no particular order) roaming the internet, reading magazines and newspapers, drinking whiskey, watching television, traveling, visiting galleries, listening to NPR, hanging out with friends, brainstorming with colleagues, and a hundred other places. Believe me, most of them weren’t good, and only a very small percentage of them became actual books.

The first project I acquired was as an editorial assistant at Harry N. Abrams, my first job in illustrated book publishing. I wanted to publish a monograph with Gregory Crewdson, a contemporary artist whose work I admired and who had been featured in the New York Times Magazine. His inclusion in the influential general-interest magazine suggested his appeal went beyond the narrow margins of the art world and that a book by him might appeal to a wider audience. He was teaching at Yale at the time, so I reached out to him by email. To my surprise, he responded positively, and after a lunch, a meeting with his gallery, a few coffees, and a bit of negotiating, we agreed we’d publish a book together.

Although it didn’t seem so at the time, the acquisition was pretty straightforward. Of course it’s easy to be nostalgic about the simplicity of the past in the face of the challenges of the present. As the culture at large has moved toward the highly visual, more publishing houses, including the big trade houses, have increased their investment in illustrated book publishing, focusing on traditional categories as well as subjects such as popular culture, style, interior design, and humor. But the direct and overhead costs of producing such books can be high, increasing the risks involved.

Meanwhile, the flourishing of the digital marketplace, which coincided with and accelerated the consolidation of chain bookstores while threatening the existence of independent ones, has also led to the rise of specialty retail outlets, shops that display and sell books as part of the growing “lifestyle” industry. In an age of e-books, physical books, especially expensive ones, not only can but also need to justify their existence. Illustrated books don’t carry the same appeal as text-heavy books in e-book format, though occasionally publishers will produce them as enhanced e-books or apps. More generally, this has led to an increasing focus on the object-ness of books and created a renaissance in design and production in this segment of the industry.

These circumstances have also resulted in a sharp increase in the number of illustrated projects pitched by agents, as well as other potential partners, including leaders of not-for-profit and commercial organizations, who see illustrated books as not only a way to bring in revenue but also a way to expand their presence in the global marketplace. This has, inevitably, resulted in a more crowded field in which projects are now frequently subject to stiff competition, preemptive offers, and bidding wars, and to a more congested marketplace where everyone needs to work harder to distinguish any given book from all the others out there. Without tie-ins to big shows at museums and similar outlets, such books do not necessarily attract attention in traditional review media.

What this also means is that more and more nonprofessional authors are creating books and being represented by agents. Such authors have always been a staple of illustrated book publishing, adding a dimension to the editor’s role unlike that in much of fiction and narrative nonfiction publishing. Although every editor has at one time or another probably rolled up her sleeves and rewritten a manuscript from beginning to end, this happens with greater frequency in visual book publishing. Often a frustrating experience, it requires skill, patience, and sometimes forbearance on the part of the editor.

Collaborating with authors who are not writers and who are also working full-time jobs—their book by necessity a side project in addition to their regular workload—is typical in illustrated book publishing. Such authors (among them artists, designers, photographers, and curators) may not be used to or proficient at expressing themselves in writing. Part of the editor’s responsibility is acting as a translator—helping authors express ideas in a language that’s not necessarily their primary one. Often their native language is a visual one, with its own vocabulary and grammar. And an important part of the editor’s job is to create a lingua franca that serves as a bridge between the visual world of the author and the audience of readers.

Early on at Abrams I assisted our editor in chief on an exhibition catalogue of the work of a revered photographer that we copublished with a distinguished museum. The curator who organized the exhibition contributed an essay to the catalogue and submitted her first draft. Although the curator was a scholar—exceptionally talented, smart, influential—writing apparently did not come easily to her, nor was it her first priority. Her primary job was to focus on the exhibition, to get it done on time while keeping the photographer happy (no easy feat). Our EIC spent days rewriting her essay, refining the larger argument while laboring over individual sentences. He sent the extensively marked-up version to her for review and she came back to him with one comment, remarking on a phrase, like many others, that he had struggled to rework: “Dear Eric, I truly dislike this sentence. Please try again, only simpler.”

Every book needs to tell a compelling story, which requires a narrative arc that takes the reader from the beginning to the end providing context, pacing, and meaning. Creating this arc for visual books is accomplished by selecting the images and organizing and sequencing them in such a way that the reader is led through the pages of a book with grace, style, and momentum. The written content of the project, whether in the form of an introductory essay, running text, or captions, is folded into the existing storyline, adding a dimension to the book that can’t be achieved by the visuals alone. Of course there are books in which the text drives the narrative, and images are added to enhance the meaning and understanding of the text, but much of the time it is the opposite.

Building this arc involves the author, editor, and a third person, the designer of the book. The importance of the role of the designer in illustrated book publishing cannot be overstated. His goal is to create the container in which the content of the book is held and to ensure that this container provides an appropriate and dynamic counterpoint to the visuals, bearing in mind the aesthetics of the material and the author’s subjective preferences. The visual concept that he creates for the book includes, but is by no means limited to, typographic choices (what font or fonts will be used), image treatment (cropped, full bleed, or neither), page layout (single or multiple images per page, where the text sits relative to the images, placement of folios and headers or footers), sequencing of images to form the narrative, and the jacket, cover, or packaging design (what is the best way to visually articulate and sell what’s inside the book). A designer’s aesthetic intelligence and engagement with the content inform the balance and interplay of these elements and profoundly impact the way the book will be seen and received. Alongside the editor and designer is the production manager, whose responsibility it is to transform these ideas into a physical object. These professionals’ ability not only to execute this shared vision but also to provide creative input, guidance, and solutions to manufacturing challenges is crucial to the outcome.

Todd Selby is a photographer with whom I’ve worked on a number of books. We’ve established a collaborative process in which the various elements of the book—images, text, design—are developed simultaneously. It is, in a sense, a moving puzzle. Todd is known for photographing creative people in creative spaces, and every one of his books is broken into chapters, each featuring a single subject. Every chapter requires a self-contained narrative (who is this person, what is his space like, what is her day/job/life like), which includes photographs, typeset text, handwritten captions, and illustrations. Todd makes a first go at the image edit, and the designer places the photographs in the layout, anticipating and leaving space where illustrations and captions might fit. Todd and I then review each page, suggest changes to the sequence, point out images that should be added, deleted, or swapped for new ones, and pass those comments to the designer, who then executes the next pass, making additional adjustments and suggestions. This process is repeated until we’re all satisfied with the result; sometimes it happens quickly, other times there’s a lot of back and forth. It’s only when the edit is finalized that the text and captions can be written, the illustrations drawn, and the layout completed.

In each of the books I’ve mentioned, there was an outside author involved whose responsibility it was to provide a basic editorial framework and visual material. That isn’t always the case in illustrated book publishing.

Recently at Phaidon my editorial colleagues and I developed an ambitious book, Body of Art, whose premise is to explore the ways the human body has served as subject, inspiration, and medium for artists around the globe over tens of thousands of years. We not only conceived the editorial premise of the book but also undertook the job of developing the content, selecting the images, and writing or closely directing all of the text—no small thing as the book included over 450 images and 100,000 words.

The images were gathered from different and sometimes little-known sources—tracked down, cleared for use in the book, and quality-checked to ensure they were submitted in a format that could be reproduced in print. Each part of that process has its own challenges. Sometimes you find an image that you want to reproduce but you can’t figure out who it belongs to, how to secure the rights to reproduce it, or how to access a print-quality version. Sometimes you know who it belongs to but they simply won’t give you permission for reasons that seem, at least to you, random, opaque, and frustrating. Other times rights holders are happy to grant you permission if you pay them, say, $10,000, which may be more than your entire picture budget. In the worst cases, sometimes you are under the belief that you have permission to use a photograph only to find out later that you sort of didn’t, after all. Unfortunately, rights problems—or other issues even harder to anticipate—often come to light only after the book has been printed. In one memorable example, a person who provided personal items as props for an artist’s work was horrified to find out that, in one image, the label on a bottle of pills detailing her prescription for an antipsychotic medication was fully legible to the reader. Most of the time, though, all goes smoothly: the rights holders are happy to have their images included in a book and are available and willing to negotiate their use.

The publisher’s obligation to a rights holder doesn’t always end with the grant of permission. As recently as a decade ago, images were provided as prints or transparencies, the goal being that the reproduction in the book mirrored the hard copy in hand. Sometimes the prints were faded or the color in the transparencies had shifted, making accurate reproduction a challenge. With the transformation of visual material from the physical to the digital, reproducing images is easier in some cases (digital files can be worked on and refined to meet an author’s exact taste and specifications) and more difficult in others, as the expectations of how these files will translate into published form is often unrealistic given the limitations of the printing process.

I’ll never forget standing in a color correcting room with the director of my production department reviewing the fifth round of color proofs with a well-known painter. (It’s not unusual to go through two or even three rounds of proofs until you get the color right, but five is pretty extraordinary.) He pointed to the proof of one of his paintings, a portrait of a woman, specifically at a spot next to her nose and asked, “Do you see that pink right there? That pink should be a surprise.” What wasn’t a surprise was that his book never made it to press: after almost a year of trying, we weren’t able to satisfy the artist’s expectations and had no choice but to cancel the book.

Other production issues can arise, sometimes related to how complicated the book is and sometimes not. I’ve seen signatures sewn in upside down, ribbon bookmarks cut too short to extend beyond the bottom of the book, and laser-cut slipcases riddled with hanging chads. Although these problems will mystify and sometimes haunt you, most of the time they get sorted out early and pale in comparison to the triumphs of an exquisitely produced book that thrills on sight.

So now we’re back at a moment that all editors experience—when the creative process is complete and the book emerges from the publisher’s warehouse into the world. But because the illustrated book is an object with a presence, it situates itself differently in the world from a novel or memoir. These books are often large, expensive, ambitiously designed and produced, and left out or stacked on tables in the home or in shops. They are not built to be hidden. Readers seem to form a different relationship with illustrated books, picking them up at will, with less pressure because they can drop into them for a minute or an hour or three. These books activate our minds, our eyes, our sense of touch, and, hopefully, our sense of pleasure in the variety of wonders the world has to offer. No small thing for an idea that came to you over a cup of coffee.





PART FIVE



Pursuing a Publishing Career


VARIETIES OF EDITORIAL EXPERIENCE





22


WIDENING THE GATES


WHY PUBLISHING NEEDS DIVERSITY


CHRIS JACKSON*

I’m often asked to speak about a thing that doesn’t actually exist: diversity in publishing.1 Ironically, I don’t think this is because people get any pleasure from hearing me talk about this thing that doesn’t exist, any more than they get pleasure from hearing strangers tediously relay the details of their dreams. And yet we keep talking about this abstraction, this thing that doesn’t exist, as if it could be conjured through the power of lectures and panel discussions. The word itself has suffered from its failure to describe a reality. Diversity has become an empty, ugly, punishing sound, like a wave of coughs or the revving of a stalled engine. It’s in the category of thing that people generally agree with in principle, although they’re not exactly sure why they’re nodding their heads, and are confused about how to actually achieve—or perhaps not confused at all but worried that it will cost more than they’re willing to bear, which for many people might be any cost at all. But I think there are ways to anchor the question of diversity in publishing in reality—and ways to achieve it that will only grow the work we do to greater abundance, with no meaningful loss.

My own story of getting into publishing, a story about my own luck and the generosity of others, is illustrative in some ways. My first attempt at a real job in publishing was when I was called in for an interview at a strange small (now defunct) publisher called Paragon House. I had just graduated from high school when I came in for that interview and hadn’t yet enrolled in college. While still in high school I interned at a small book-packaging company, and the summer after I graduated, I freelanced for other small, weird publishers of the kind that used to dot New York City. It was a strange job choice for an eighteen-year-old, but I’d loved books and libraries and bookstores all my life. I had been raised in the projects, raised in an apocalyptic religion, primarily by my mother and a host of old ladies who still talked with southern accents and retraced the Great Migration every summer. Books had been my salvation on project playgrounds and in the backseat of our beat-up car driving back to North Carolina and back—first fantasy epics, then the hodgepodge of popular fiction my mother brought home from the library, then Kurt Vonnegut, which led to Joseph Heller and Herman Hesse and Celine, and then, awakened by hip-hop, I took a turn into the black arts movement, to Baraka and Sanchez and Nikki Giovanni, and then back to Ellison and Wright and Baldwin, and then forward again to Lorde and Reed and Bambara and Morrison.

There was little popular publishing for black readers, at least from mainstream publishers; what there was was done by small houses like Holloway House, who published thrillingly well-crafted pulp like Pimp by Iceberg Slim and the works of Donald Goines, which I found on the book tables of 125th Street in Harlem, where I lived. Up the street from those tables was Liberation Books, where I found works by Afrocentric scholars like Molefi Asante and John Henrik Clark. New York’s tonier independent bookstores back then used to look on black boys with the same suspicion, contempt, and fear as the rest of the city in that era of the Central Park Five and Bernie Goetz. I would mostly go to Barnes & Noble—there was only one in Manhattan back then, on Eighteenth Street and Fifth Avenue—a store large enough that no one really took mind of my presence. You could go to a Barnes & Noble and go to the black books section and see nothing but great literature. I’d just go through the books in that section one by one. All winners. These weren’t writers who were necessarily taught in my classes in school, but their work awakened me and transported me and reframed my own vision. I would dive into the worlds the books created and then look up from every page and notice that my own world was changing, too.

But I wasn’t ready to go to college—my father died when I was four, and my mother was very sick in my last year of high school and died that summer. The religion I was raised in forbade college—a prohibition which was an almost unnecessary additional impediment to most of the kids who were in it, or at least the ones I knew, who were already stuck in low-income housing and failing schools and living at the peak of the most murderous period in the city’s recent history. Still, I needed a job. I thought about driving a bread truck, like one of my close friends, or learning how to repair air conditioners. I tried to get a job as a security guard or loading freight or answering phones for the Better Business Bureau. I could not get any of these jobs.

But I did get that job at Paragon House. My high school internship led to summer work, and that led to an interview with the editor in chief at Paragon House. He came right out of central casting, or out of my own imagination of what an editor in chief might look like —I remember him, an impishly mischievous white man, jaded and ruefully grinning (or grimacing) all the time. Bald and round and always in rolled-up sleeves; in my memory he’s chomping on a cigar, but that seems unlikely. He told me in the interview that the company was owned by Korean businessmen. He laughed about the creative ways he was burning through the “Korean investors’” money, publishing the idiosyncratic books he loved in beautiful, award-winning, expensively designed packages. He hired whomever he wanted (as long as they wanted to work at Paragon House, which narrowed the field), and knew he could get away with it all as long as the company also published a series of esoteric conference proceedings the Korean investors insisted on.

I was eighteen. It sounded like fun, although I found his glee at sticking it to his investors peculiar and maybe a little racist—this was 1990, a time when fear of rising Asian power was at one of its periodic peaks. I sat in his office for hours. We talked about the books we were reading. He pulled some books about publishing off his shelves and gave them to me—Scott Berg’s biography of Maxwell Perkins among them. I found the whole scene intoxicating—the buzzing office, the book talk, the idea that I was following in the footsteps of Maxwell Perkins, whoever he was, and that I was looking, finally, at literature’s workshop up close and possibly taking a place in it.

The editor in chief asked me to immediately do some part-time work on a probationary basis, filling in for an assistant editor who’d gone off on a some long, exotic-seeming journey. I walked out of the interview into a cubicle, and the first task I was given was to type a rejection letter, the first, maybe, of millions. A busy-looking editor came over and quickly dictated the letter to me while I scrambled to write it all down on a pad. Then I pulled my chair up to the typewriter, eager to prove myself, and realized that I had no idea how to type a letter. I’d never typed a letter in my life. Where on the page do you start? I decided to start at the upper left-hand corner of the page, tight against the edge of the paper. I didn’t really understand margins, so the whole letter sat up at the top left corner of the page. I typed the letter quickly—I was at least a fast typist—and handed it over to the editor, who, I remember, was smoking a cigarette in her office at the time. She looked at the letter—in my memory it was stained with the sweat of my anxiety—and shook her head. “You have no idea how to do this, do you?” she asked.

And then she told me how to do it. And then they hired me.

Now the job, it turned out, was a little crazy. The Korean investors turned out to be Sun Myung Moon’s Unification Church. The back-office staff was made up entirely of church members, many of whom were married to each other. But the editorial staff was made up of secular, frankly godless, publishing romantics. A French editor who handled our translation projects took me out once a week for a lunch of mimosas and a little book club—she wanted me to read all of Faulkner with her. A freelance lawyer with whom I worked to create a contract boilerplate—well, I typed it—taught me all about publishing contracts and law. Two exotically beautiful assistant editors—one a salty, militantly bohemian English man who’d just graduated from the University of Pennsylvania with a degree in advanced mathematics, the other a young black woman with dreads who’d just finished at the New School—did their best to corrupt me after hours and with more reading assignments: Anaïs Nin, Rimbaud; Didion, Hunter Thompson; Luc Sante, Barthes, Ngugi wa Thiong’o, Amos Tutuola. I worked there for less than two years, mostly part time, and eventually enrolled at Columbia, but I never looked back; I worked in and around books and publishing more or less from that point forward.


So what does this say about the way publishing can diversify? Well, a few things. First: I was not, to put it lightly, qualified for the job in a technical sense. I was a recent high school graduate. I’d never worked in an office before. I didn’t have a résumé and didn’t even know how to type a letter. I’d read deeply in certain areas but in the style of an autodidact, not a scholar. But I was passionate about the work. I was willing to learn. And I became an asset to that strange company, instead of a likely terrible security guard.

Publishing, it turns out, is a job you can learn while doing, if people are willing to help a little. I was lucky to find my way into a publishing house that was not constrained by corporate hiring practices, so they could take a risk on someone like me. Those of us in publishing are here—at least this is what I believe, in my heart of hearts—because we love literature and ideas and we want to share those ideas. There is a kind of generosity at the heart of publishing: in fact, that generosity is the engine of the business—our work is premised on our irrepressible impulse to share ideas and art, to tell stories. And this impulse—the sharing of knowledge, the sharing of art—is what allowed me to get a foothold in the business itself. The people I worked with didn’t expect me to arrive fully formed, and they loved the opportunity my massive ignorance presented: they could teach me even as I was assisting them. It gave them a chance to articulate and rethink and even question how they worked, what they thought they knew—and whether Faulkner was actually any good or not. It was an exchange that strengthened all of us.

Today, too often I see the opposite in book publishing. It is, despite its periodic challenges, a competitive business to get into, and editorial assistant openings usually generate a pile of great résumés and recommendations from colleagues. But I try to think about my job as not just hiring the person whose credentials add to my own status; or even, necessarily, hiring someone who is ready to do the job on day one. The job is fairly uncomplicated at the technical level—what’s important is that you be able to read and write exceptionally well and that you think and care deeply about art and ideas and stories, traits that people with multiple degrees might never cultivate, but that an eighteen-year-old for whom books and stories and ideas are a salvation might. It takes five minutes to learn how to format a letter; it takes a week to learn most of the internal systems of a company. Every new hire is a chance for me to learn something new in teaching them—to question something I thought I knew, to have my ideas challenged, to have my status quo in some way shifted. And in publishing, those opportunities are far more valuable than a premastery of technical knowledge that can be easily learned on the job. And yet a lack of credentials, connections, and certain forms of experience can sometimes bar people at the entry level. They never even get in the door.

I’ve taught at the City College Publishing Institute—and I also work sometimes at the Columbia Publishing Course—and can see firsthand how brilliant students at CCNY are sometimes handicapped by a lack of social capital and certain forms of easily acquired technical knowledge, by a lack of confidence, and by not even knowing what’s expected of them, whereas the kids who come through the far more expensive Columbia program are more polished and likely to be hired, but no smarter or more likely to contribute in substantive ways to the mission of a publishing house. Educational institutions should do more to prepare those students from less wealthy backgrounds—and publishers can contribute to helping schools that serve working-class and poor and African American and immigrant students—but on our side, the hiring side, we should think about what the true qualifications for these jobs are, what can be taught and what can’t. We’re all strapped for time and resources, but there’s no better way to sustain the status quo than to refuse to take chances, even chances that might put us as some risk.


What’s the payoff of having a more diverse workforce? Well, there’s obviously the moral case to be made—and that’s a case that I think applies to any industry. But in book publishing, I think we have a special obligation, given our central role in shaping the culture. I hope a couple of stories will show how I’ve come to this idea.

One of the authors I’ve worked with is Eddie Huang. Eddie is Taiwanese American and a cultural sponge. He’s a brilliant polymath, and as a writer he’s trying to build a fresh idiom out of the languages that mix and merge in his own consciousness. The language is sometimes obscure, sometimes vulgar—it takes from Mandarin and hip-hop and feminist theory and a million other idioms. But it’s also often beautiful, and using this new language he is able to say new things about the world.

I published his first book, Fresh off the Boat, at the house where I worked before my current one. Some readers loved the book—it was a bestseller—but some people found the language jarring. One of my bosses at that publishing company actually asked me to go back into the now-published, bestselling book and edit out the more obscure references and the passages she found vulgar. It was pretty astonishing. I refused, of course, because I felt like what Eddie was up to was something that I kind of wanted her to find vulgar and maybe even obscure. Because for a certain audience, reading Eddie’s work was the moment when they finally felt their own language reflected in a book.

One night recently Eddie and I had a public conversation about his second book, Double Cup Love. The event was in a packed room full of black readers, and Asian American readers, and white readers, and Native American readers, who all responded with passion and gratitude to the same language that this colleague of mine had found so vulgar that she thought some of it should be excised from Eddie’s work. For this second book Eddie appeared on NPR and The Daily Show and hip-hop radio stations and on the front page of the arts section of the New York Times. The world was catching up to what he’s doing—and even as he evolved, at no point did he feel like he had to compromise his voice to achieve this effect, which was part of what I thought of as my role: to protect him from the pressure to conform to the gaze of the dominant culture. I knew from my own life experience as an outsider what can be lost when we aren’t allowed to speak our own languages—the ways meaning and nuance are diminished, the way some stories go untold altogether, or are told wrong.

In 2015 Marlon James wrote about how writers, sometimes without realizing it, pander to the person they imagine to be the gatekeeper and how we are all poorer for it. Marlon, who won the Booker Prize that year, has since told me that there were books he wanted to write but never did because he knew they’d be written in vain, because that imagined gatekeeper would reject them. And based on my experience, he may have been wise not to try. When we expand the range of the industry’s gatekeepers, we expand the range of our storytelling, which expands our ability to see each other, to talk and listen to each other, and to understand each other. It allows more people to see themselves represented in literature; and it allows the rest of us to listen in, to understand our neighbors and fellow citizens, their lives and concerns, their grievances and their beauty, their stories and ideas, their language. The empathic bridges this creates between us is one of the essential functions of literature in a democracy. But it can only happen if we widen the gates of literature and diversify the gatekeepers.


Another quick story about the value of diversity: In 2015 I published a book called Between the World and Me by Ta-Nehisi Coates. I had met Ta-Nehisi a dozen or so years earlier—we were set up on a lunch date by his agent, the remarkable Gloria Loomis, because she felt like we should get to know each other. We were both youngish black men, from somewhat similar backgrounds and with some of the same tastes and interests, so she thought we should meet. We met by his office at the Village Voice and talked for hours about a book idea he had about his own father, a Black Panther and a radical publisher and an aggressive proponent of free love. We eventually shaped that idea into his first memoir, The Beautiful Struggle, which I bought for a few thousand dollars—I was, it happens, the only person who even wanted to bid on the book. I thought Ta-Nehisi was a brilliant writer and a fascinating thinker, if not particularly well credentialed at that point in his life. But he was a writer. What he didn’t know about writing a memoir—which was a lot—he would learn or, better yet, ignore. By the time he started working on The Beautiful Struggle, Ta-Nehisi had quit the Village Voice and lost a pretty terrible job at Time magazine. He was blogging to an audience of dozens. But I felt like the story he was telling—of growing up in a radical household in the drug and murder-scarred 1980s in a Baltimore not so dissimilar from the Harlem of my own childhood—was a vital and largely untold one. So together we took a chance.

That book has now sold over a hundred thousand copies, but when it was first published, it didn’t do much business. But Ta-Nehisi and I had developed a creative connection and spent some years concocting another book idea, one about the Civil War based on his immersion in history and scholarship of that era. By this point Ta-Nehisi had been brought onto the staff of the Atlantic. While we contemplated that Civil War book, Ta-Nehisi wrote one blockbuster magazine piece after another, culminating in his award-winning “The Case for Reparations.” As the drumbeat of murders of young black folks—starting with Trayvon Martin and then on to too many men, women, and children to name—got louder and louder in recent years, Ta-Nehisi and I talked about attempting a book that would address the crisis and the anguish we were feeling about it. At Ta-Nehisi’s recommendation, we decided to reread, together, Baldwin’s The Fire Next Time. When he finished his reading, Ta-Nehisi called me and asked: Why don’t people write books like this anymore? And I said, You should try. So he did.

We went through several drafts and many more arguments—Ta-Nehisi and I always argue, but, I like to think, we argue like brothers, people who fundamentally believe in each other’s integrity and our sense of common cause. And, of course, he wins most of the arguments because it’s his book—and I’m usually, eventually, grudgingly, grateful to take the loss. Eventually the book—Between the World and Me—came out and became a sensation: selling over a million copies, winning a National Book Award, and in some ways changing the conversation about racist violence in this country.

Would that book have been the same without a black editor working on it? I’m not sure. I really don’t know and wouldn’t want to speculate, but what I do know is that the relationship I developed with Ta-Nehisi was rooted in his trust that I was not trying to soften his message or channel him into a position of pandering. He knew that I understood in an intimate way the human consequences of white supremacy. It allowed for a deep collaboration and, I think, a special book.


At the time of writing this piece, I’m preparing to relaunch an old imprint at Random House called One World. Rather than just cranking up the engine on a typical publishing imprint, my dream is to treat it in a prefigurative way—to create, in a small corner of the Random House building, the model for what I think all of publishing should look like, what the world in some sense should look like. It will be an attempt to bring some meaning back to that shell “diversity,” to actually put the concept into action, to give it blood and life. That will inform the way we hire, the way we acquire, edit, and publish books, and the ways we cultivate audiences. This will require some work and time, but what it won’t require is a diminution in the quality, or even commercial prospects, of the imprint. It will only make it stronger. I believe in book publishing, in its capacity to help us all retrace our paths back into history, to see the present in all its complexity, and to imagine different futures. To do that we have to build a publishing industry—at all levels of publishing—that honors the potential, the complexity, and the fullness of the world itself.





23


THE APPRENTICE


ON BEING AN EDITORIAL ASSISTANT


KATIE HENDERSON ADAMS*

In an era with few true apprenticeships left, publishing still has something approaching that old tradition: the job of editorial assistant. The assistant—shepherding manuscripts through every step of publication, reading alongside his boss, managing communication between all of the house’s departments, and building professional relationships out of house—is an editor in training as well as an invaluable contributor to the process. The assistant handles plenty of tedious tasks—photocopying, form-filling, mailings, and the like—and the details of the job vary from one publisher or industry sector to the next, but the work is never just secretarial. Many if not most editors keep their own calendars and answer their own phones, while some assistants will find themselves reading submissions virtually from day one. When the relationship is working best, the editorial assistant will have instant recall for deadlines and due dates, nuanced understanding of each author’s specific needs and styles, and an ever-growing awareness of both the house’s list and the business in general.

Plucked from a heap of newly minted BAs, editorial assistants are frequently English majors with aspirations to write. Many realize quickly that publishing is not for them, and more than a few end up on the well-trodden path to law school. Others discover that sifting through the contents of another writer’s brain is excruciating when one’s own writing beckons. Those that come in citing their favorite books as Cranford or Malone Dies find early on that an undergraduate knowledge of Western literature, though useful, is woefully inadequate for understanding the contemporary publishing marketplace. Clever new hires immediately begin trolling new release tables, scanning best-seller lists, and following industry websites and newsletters for a crash course in what makes authors and books successful.

As the job title implies, the editorial assistant’s primary role is to support one or more editors. As an editor builds her career, the volume of work that only she can do—especially evaluating submissions and editing manuscripts—increases until it reaches a critical mass, so delegation becomes essential. Though a good editor must be involved in all aspects of book making, must have an eye for design, a brain for publicity and marketing, and an ear for good copy to help describe the book, a busy one will find that the tasks offering the most significant value to the company must be prioritized. It’s in these situations that a good editorial assistant becomes a precious asset. Authors and agents know that when they need a quick, reliable answer they can call or email the EA and get it with a smile, and when coworkers need an update on an author’s copyedited manuscript or the most recent version of a jacket, they can skip the editor altogether and go right to the all-knowing assistant.

At almost every step of the process, the editorial assistant has the opportunity to both execute a task and learn something valuable about a future career as an editor. For example, when the first copies of a finished book arrive from the printer, I will often ask my assistant to overnight one to the author immediately, with a personal note of congratulations from me. The author will eventually receive a contracted quantity of copies from the warehouse, but this first book fresh off the presses is something special. The publishing business is a fickle one with relatively little in the way of guaranteed rewards; the editor should help the author celebrate every victory, however small. The finished cover, the first galley, the first good prepublication review, and certainly the arrival of finished books—each happy moment should be feted. To an assistant, mailing this book might seem a menial task, but for one interested in learning about the business and sharing the joy of the job, it’s a lesson in taking good care of our authors and making sure they know that their book is as special to us as it is to them. Publishing their work is a sacred trust, and it’s important to be worthy of it.

These low-level tasks can also be the building blocks of long-term relationships within the business. Sometimes that box of author’s copies (or a finalized contract, a new version of the book jacket, etc.) can take a while to arrive, so it’s not uncommon that an agent’s assistant will check in with the editorial assistant for a status update. The best-case scenario would be that these two communicate with friendly authority, handling the small issue with minimal input from either boss. In this way crucial connections are formed. Many a high-powered editor and super-agent who seem to publish dozens of books together started their relationship in the trenches as assistants. An editorial assistant of course should be as helpful and professional with agents as possible, but those agent’s assistants can be industry peers for decades to come.

Though acquisitions are primarily the responsibility of the editor, in some houses the editorial assistant will begin reading submissions for her boss almost immediately. Due to the volume of submissions most editors receive, they need their editorial assistants to be an extra set of eyes to either read submissions first—flagging those that are worth extra attention and drafting rejections for those that aren’t—or evaluate promising projects alongside their boss. The discussions that follow—about strengths and weaknesses of a project, the author’s expertise, the book’s marketability, etc.—are a way for the editorial assistant to absorb the taste of her boss as well as a range of insights into what makes a successful book. The volume of reading can be overwhelming, but it’s also—for most of us—the reason we got into this business in the first place. The editorial assistant who doesn’t enjoy reading submissions is probably not long for the publishing world.

No part of the job is more important, or unrelenting, than manuscript tracking: moving the author’s work into and through the production process. Usually the editor is the one who knows when production can expect the manuscript in the first place, when it will go into copyediting and begin its transformation from Word file to physical book. But after that, it’s the editorial assistant’s job to keep track of this winding, often halting, journey. When the copyedited manuscript goes to the author, when it comes back, when first pass is ready, when it’s due back from the author—these deadlines are all essential to keeping the schedule moving, and at any given moment there are several books in the pipeline at different stages of completion. Procedures vary, and in some houses the managing editor’s staff will handle back-and-forth with the author through production. But the EA will still need to keep on top of progress and field queries from other departments or the author. It’s a challenge in both organization and communication.

Publishers’ production departments are for the most part incredibly flexible, and though they try very hard to keep editors and authors from wandering off schedule, when that occasionally does happen, Production can be counted on to shift and maneuver to minimize the damage. Their superhuman skill set stops short, however, of mind reading. If the editor wants to read through the ending of the copyedited manuscript again before passing it along to the author, or if the author needs an extra week reviewing first pass because she just had a baby—this can be accommodated only if everyone knows about it. The editorial assistant’s alerting colleagues to each exception and request ahead of time, instead of waiting for someone to notice the manuscript is late and begin chasing it down, not only prevents myriad delays and missteps but also keeps the editor in good standing with her coworkers.

Each editor has a reputation in-house, good or bad, for timeliness, professional courtesy, realism, honesty, and communication. No editor—or editorial assistant—can prevent unexpected changes to a manuscript’s schedule. But when the editorial assistant initiates the conversation, checking in or passing along an update, everyone involved in the process is assured that someone’s in control and that Editorial understands the concerns of other departments. It’s an absolutely crucial element to ensuring that everyone involved feels like a valued, respected member of the team. Not only does this elevate the finished product, but it banks goodwill for those inevitable occasions when editors find themselves delayed and asking someone else to pick up the slack. (When an excellent editorial assistant leaves a job, one of the greatest compliments he can receive is to see sheer despondency in the production department; a great EA will keep the trains running so well the managing editorial staff won’t believe it can happen without him.)

Manuscript tracking is laborious, but the most tedious work an EA will face is undoubtedly the dreaded permissions log. Publishers take seriously the responsibility of securing permission to use excerpts and images from their original copyright holders, and every song lyric, quotation, and photograph must be evaluated for fair use. It’s a lot of painstaking work. Contractually, determining whether something requires permission, requesting it appropriately, receiving it, paying for it, and documenting it in an organized way are all responsibilities of the author. In reality, many authors don’t turn to this until they’ve finished the involved and taxing process of revising their manuscript with their editor. They’re often exhausted and hoping their delivery and acceptance payment is close at hand, so it can be delicate to introduce a new project of this magnitude. Often it’s the EA’s job to break the news, relay the requirements, and sometimes even step in to help with some of the legwork. I’ve known EAs to work for months with authors on tracking down errant heirs and combing multilingual archives for permission to use a vital piece of text. It’s exhausting work with little reward, but every editor who’s worked her way through the ranks has been there too.

The job itself will teach the editorial assistant a great deal, but extra interest, enthusiasm, and curiosity are rewarded with extra knowledge. When I’m working on our title information sheets (TIs, called tipsheets or sellsheets in some houses), on which we list not only a description of the book but key selling points and relevant comparative titles, I will often give a list of similar recent books to my editorial assistant so that he can look up the sales figures on those titles. If they’re strong, I’ll ask that they be added to the TI. I’m always pleased when the editorial assistant takes that opportunity to ask me why I’ve chosen those titles. Perhaps it will be obvious—the comp titles are recent entries in the same category, such as Civil War histories or popular biographies of women scientists—but sometimes it’s more subtle. If I’m working on a novel about a family of women in Jamaica, I may look for a range of comp titles, some of which have a similar setting (books by Marlon James or Tiphanie Yanique, perhaps) while others have similar emotional content (those by Vaddey Ratner or Alice Hoffman). I’m happy to explain my thinking, and as the process continues and we seek endorsements from other writers, get the sales team’s reaction to the manuscript, and see reviewers compare the book to others like it, a richer understanding emerges about the interconnected web of writers and readers within which we’re working.

This ever-growing knowledge of both how to position a book and the network of similar books into which it’s being published comes in especially handy when writing the many rounds of copy each book requires. Often editorial assistants are responsible for at least early drafts of TI copy, catalog copy, and finally jacket copy. Each description of the book may require something slightly different, as each has a different audience in mind (sales representatives, critics and booksellers, and consumers, respectively). Finding the most effective way to describe a book, using evocative prose that doesn’t distract from the writer’s work, and developing a style that the editor appreciates all take time, but once conquered this can be one of the most impactful contributions to a book’s publication. Go into a bookstore and watch readers browse the shelves, poring over the cover blurbs as they decide which books to buy, placing many back on the shelf; it’s a bracing reminder of just how important it is to master writing good copy.

Even more useful, if less common, is when an editor can mentor an EA in the editing process itself. When I was an assistant, I was fortunate enough to have a boss who was willing to let me learn how to edit using one of his authors’ manuscripts. He chose a veteran author who needed little in the way of tinkering, and he assigned me a chapter to edit, then edited both the chapter itself and my comments before passing them along to the author. The author got his notes, and I learned a lot about how to help a writer reframe an argument and how to gently correct a mistake (preserving the author’s morale is as important as fine-tuning the words on the page). This kind of careful mentoring is time consuming, and as the demands of the business get even more arduous, that time can be difficult to find. But this is how the editorial craft is learned, honed, and passed on. An EA who shows a burgeoning passion for the work will tend to benefit from such opportunities.

As the assistant gains experience and the relationship with her editor evolves, it can become increasingly beneficial to each party. An EA will start to suggest strong comps and insightful blurbers. She may be able to build buzz about certain titles among publishing’s youngest generation or advocate for a galley mailing to the Young to Publishing Group. She should look to turn her youth into an advantage, and in this era, that includes as much awareness and understanding of the internet and social media as is humanly possible. As others discuss in this book, the editor’s role is evolving to include further publicity, marketing, and general publishing responsibilities, and an EA who can offer digital savvy is invaluable and will soon be imperative. Many publishing relationships are now being built online, and when I’m hiring an assistant, looking at a stack of résumés from smart readers with relevant internships and strong educational backgrounds, those who also demonstrate an understanding of how to use the web as a pivotal tool rise quickly to the top.

No matter how dedicated or fastidious they are, assistants make mistakes. Tasks slip through the cracks, deadlines are missed, messages are forgotten. Even the most eager assistant can make a big mother of a mistake, one that can have serious consequences. When I was an assistant I once emailed a deal memo—a sheet confirming all the relevant points of a negotiated deal including total advance and royalty rates—to the UK publisher from whom my boss had acquired US rights to the book. Or had I? Actually, I’d accidentally sent it to a literary agent who had the same first name—one of the toughest, most successful agents in the business. Not only did I embarrass myself in front of a powerful agent, but I also revealed to her that the author in question didn’t have an agent and was working directly with publishers. In the coming months she snapped him up and undoubtedly made my boss’s life much more difficult in subsequent negotiations. I felt sick when I discovered this mistake and immediately apologized and took full responsibility. My boss saw that nothing he could say could make me feel any worse than I already felt, so he generously forgave me. Lesson painfully learned. The wise assistant will own up to mistakes before they become crises, and the humane boss will recall that he has a blunder or two on his own record.

Of course, not all bosses are humane. The quality of life for an editorial assistant is defined in large part by the quality of his boss. The publishing world is full of generous, attentive editors who willingly share their time and insight. But as in any other business, there are also some temperamental, demanding bosses who can make the editorial assistant’s life hell. I’ve seen assistants insulted for their education, taste, intelligence, beliefs, and even physical appearance. I’ve heard tales of editorial duties pushed aside in favor of filling out a boss’s child’s preschool applications or returning a boss’s designer dress with no receipt. The more mercurial the editor, the harder it can be for the editorial assistant to evaluate the appeal of the job itself, so the question whether to stick it out and climb the ranks or flee for greener pastures can be especially difficult. Those who stay, though, can be sure they’ve found their passion.

A time will come when the assistant has absorbed these hard-won lessons, the rhythm of the publishing schedule has become second nature, and the assistant moves from rookie status to trusted veteran. She gets promoted to assistant editor, then perhaps associate editor, and by this point may have had the opportunity to make a few independent acquisitions. Given the ratio of work to employees in today’s publishing industry, even the “associate” is probably still assisting a senior colleague. Almost every assistant I’ve ever spoken to on this subject has hoped that several years of devoted service will result eventually in a promotion to editor and an end to assistant work. For a lucky few, this works out. If the assistant is able to acquire enough books that she makes a strong case for her fiscal contribution to the company, perhaps she’ll get her own list. Sometimes serendipitous timing will see one editor exit just when a younger colleague is ready for promotion, and a transition is possible.

Most of the time, however, you have to move out to move up. No matter how conscientious or supportive your boss, no one is going to manage your career for you. Especially if you’re great at your job, no one is going to help you leave. But they’ll understand if you do. There are advantages to starting as a newly minted editor in a new professional environment. All of your relationships in-house will be defined by your current position, not the one you held for years before. It’s an opportunity to tell agents a new story about yourself: this is my new gig and my new address, and this is the kind of book I want to acquire and publish. And if you’ve done it right, you’ve left behind nothing but strong, deep relationships with your colleagues and friends at the publisher where you cut your teeth.





24


THIS PENCIL FOR HIRE


MAKING A CAREER AS A FREELANCE EDITOR


KATHARINE O’MOORE-KLOPF*

Rarely do editors start their careers by deciding to be self-employed, but many do end up freelancing. Their role in book publishing often goes unnoticed by authors and by people outside publishing because there is no centralized source to count them or document what they do. Freelance editors may also do different types of editing, as discussed throughout this collection, and may have a variety of clients including book publishers, authors, and other organizations or types of publishers.





WHY FREELANCE?


Because of the major changes to traditional publishing since about 2007—including the advent of electronic publishing and the associated opportunity for editors to work remotely—many more editors freelance now than ever before. But there is no “one true path” to becoming a freelance editor, though it might have once seemed that way. My own route to freelancing might be broadly similar to that of many in my generation: Fresh out of university with a bachelor’s degree in journalism at the beginning of the 1980s, I intended to be an investigative journalist like Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. I spent two years as a reporter in Texas and thoroughly enjoyed it. When I became a parent, however, I realized that working the night shift wasn’t going to allow me to care for a baby, be a good reporter, and get any sleep. After a move to Colorado, I left journalism to take a job in the public relations department of a hospital.

But public relations and I weren’t a comfortable match, so I moved on to working for a tiny, family-run publishing house, editing manuscripts and then typesetting them. Two years later, I ended up in New York as a production editor for a major trade publishing house. By that point, working with books and journals had become my true love. I later became a production editor for a medical publisher in New York City. After four years there, I had another child and decided to try freelancing full time. That was a good decision: shortly afterward that publisher was bought by a larger one, and later in turn by a yet larger one, and many staff members were laid off. I started freelancing in 1995, beginning with projects from my former employers, and as of this writing I’m still doing it. I’m pretty sure that means I’ve succeeded.

But why do others go freelance? There are several common reasons.

The majority of editors who become freelancers do so because they have been laid off from publishing jobs. This continues not just with traditional book publishers but also with digital media. For example, in 2016 Yahoo, IBT Media, and Mashable laid off large numbers of employees. It’s a good bet that a number of their former editors are now self-employed.

Not all freelance editors are former employees of publishers, however. Some may be seeking a career change from a profession that is no longer as satisfying as it once seemed or that no longer has as many staff jobs as it once did. Often they come from professions at least somewhat related to editing: teacher, librarian, writer, journalist, translator. It is possible to become a freelance editor without a publishing background, but it requires additional training and hard work to convince potential clients that the new editor can edit. Taking courses through professional associations, training organizations, and universities and attending the annual meetings of associations are excellent ways to learn about the business of editing and about editing itself. Some of the entities offering in-person and online training or annual meetings in the United States are listed in the Further Resources list at the end of this volume.

Rather than freelance because they’ve been laid off or want to change careers, some editors choose self-employment for personal reasons. Some may want to more closely integrate work and the rest of their life. Commuting to and from a job can be exhausting, put stress on family relationships, and decrease time available for other life interests. Also, employers don’t always offer enough sick days or other time off for editors with chronic health issues, but self-employed editors can adjust their work schedules to make up time lost to illness and visits to health-care providers. Some editors may have to provide care for children or other family members. (As a freelancer, I have at times edited while breastfeeding an infant who was sleeping in a baby sling across my chest, and later edited while bouncing a grandchild on my knee.) These editors go freelance so that they can be at home when their children are not in school, be at home with a high-needs child, or be available to help provide care for aging parents. Having the ability to rearrange work hours can make caretaking easier.





THE BUSINESS OF FREELANCING


To succeed as a freelancer, editors must learn how to run their own business. They must determine what business structure should they use—sole proprietorship, limited liability company, or some type of corporation. They have to decide who their clients will be—publishers, individual authors, editorial services (also called packagers), or a mix of these. They have to know when to pay estimated taxes to the federal government and, in many cases, to their state government. The questions continue: How do they create a business budget? What office equipment, tangible supplies, and intangible (e.g., digital) resources will they need? What about work flow? Do they work on one project at a time, or can they arrange their schedule to juggle projects that are each in a different stage (e.g., editing, author review of editing, cleanup after author review)? Helpful sources of information about these topics include professional associations through face-to-face meetings, online courses and webinars, and subscription-only email discussion groups; books written for the self-employed; the US Small Business Administration; online editorial communities within Facebook and LinkedIn; mentors found through serendipity or through professional associations; materials and tools accessed through links in the Copyeditors’ Knowledge Base; and university courses and degree programs.1





GENERALIST OR SPECIALIST?


Whether a self-employed editor should be a generalist or a specialist has long been hotly debated in the community of freelancers. Generalists can take on any subject matter they like. But specialists can often command higher fees because of their expertise. If editors are easily bored by working with one subject all the time, they’ll fare better, interest-wise, as generalists. But if they have a passion for a subject such as politics, education, medicine and health care, chemistry, or biography, they will likely gravitate to clients who can offer them projects in that subject.

Sometimes freelancers don’t consciously choose a specialty; they fall into it. Most often they develop specialties because clients note that they are talented at editing in certain subject matters, the way actors become typecast because of specific roles they handle brilliantly. But sometimes they want to develop a specialty because it sounds interesting or because they know it will allow them to bring in higher fees. To break into a new niche, freelancers may have to take courses, possibly earn certificates or obtain certification, read books on their desired field, and then convince some current clients to let them try their hand at editing manuscripts in that field. Publishers will often give such opportunities to freelancers whose work they have come to trust. And freelancers should not be afraid to ask for opportunities rather than wait for them to fall from the sky.

Other types of specialization involve the kinds of editorial tasks freelancers handle and the broad areas they focus on. There are freelancers who do developmental editing, line editing, production editing, or copyediting. Few do all of those tasks, because each task requires a different mindset and focus. Some freelancers choose to focus on manuscripts for university presses, textbooks, or fiction.

Sometimes editors will go freelance and already have specialized knowledge and experience. This can help them target clients who will offer manuscripts in their specialty. As an employee, I started out as a generalist. I became a medical editor because a lifelong interest in medical topics led me to take a job as a production editor for a medical publisher. I learned on the job because my university degree is in journalism rather than in any of the sciences. After a few early years as a generalist freelancer, I decided to capitalize on that medical editing experience. I continued educating myself about the field, and I sought and achieved board certification as an editor in the life sciences. Though there is no certification available in the United States for other editing specialties, some professional organizations in other nations offer general editing certification exams.2 After obtaining certification, I began marketing my services as a medical editor. I get the manuscripts and clients that I want, can turn away those that don’t seem a good fit, and can charge much higher fees than I could as a generalist.





OTHER BUSINESS ISSUES FOR FREELANCERS


As is the case for editors who are employees, work life for freelance editors is affected by such factors as the state of the national economy, changes in the publishing industry, the need for continuing professional development, and the necessity of learning to use new work tools.





Finances


The US and world economies affect how well freelance editors do financially. For example, the financial crisis that began in the United States in 2007 caused a global recession. Because of it, some publishers reduced the number of new book titles produced each year. There were also huge layoffs in the industry in 2009, creating a large new pool of potential freelancers to compete for fewer assignments. In addition, some publishers even took editing work back in-house as a cost-cutting measure. Early in the following decade, however, the general sense in the freelancer community was that business was picking up again.

In the short term, freelance editors can experience business cash-flow issues in these instances: clients don’t pay their invoices within an agreed-on time span; clients push back project schedules, leaving a gap in freelancers’ work flow; freelancers are not vigilant about maintaining a consistent level of marketing of their services to clients; and freelancers have unexpected illnesses or disruptive life events, such as a death in their family. To mitigate problems such as these, freelancers must set aside funds for lower-income times, plan ahead, stay in constant communication with clients, and have a backup network of colleagues they can refer their clients to if necessary. They also need to spend some time each workday on marketing activities, to keep projects coming in.

What are those marketing activities? Freelancers should network, keeping in touch with former employers who may need their services, making new connections with potential clients, and consulting with and helping colleagues, often through social media, professional associations, and professional email discussion lists. They also need to market their services by (1) acting like the business owners that they are and (2) building a robust online presence within social media platforms (most often Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter) and having a business website that they update often to draw visitors.

Freelance editors are generally not required to carry professional liability insurance, which is also called errors and omissions insurance, because they are not responsible for the final content of publications; authors and publishers are. However, freelance writers, as content creators, are sometimes required to have this kind of insurance.





A Global Work Pool and Outsourcing


Thanks to electronic technology, US publishers can now lower their production costs by seeking out editors from other countries with costs of living lower than those in the United States. Such editors will generally accept lower fees than US freelancers will.

Another way that publishers cut costs is to outsource projects to editing and production services, often called packagers. For each project they take on from publishers, these services line up freelance editors, proofreaders, indexers, book designers, and other self-employed editorial professionals. In return for handling these administrative tasks, packagers take a cut from the fees that they pay freelancers.

In the self-publishing arena (sometimes called indie publishing), authors may use bidding services, such as Upwork and Reedsy, to find the editorial professionals they need. The authors, who are the clients in this setting, post project descriptions online with the bidding services and then review all bids from freelancers. Within the community of freelance editors, these services have poor reputations because the bidding process and authors’ expectations often mean that the freelancers chosen will be paid extremely low fees. Also tarnishing these services is that they often do not allow direct contact between freelancers and authors, which takes away the collaboration that can make the author–editor relationship most beneficial for manuscripts.





Continuing Professional Development and Work Tools


Like all professionals, freelance editors must engage in continuing professional development and keep up with new technologies if they want to continue garnering projects. Freelancers can sharpen their skills and learn new ones by attending editorial associations’ annual conferences and taking short courses. For example, at the 2015 annual meeting of the Council of Science Editors, whose members include both in-house and freelance science editors, there were sessions about topics such as preparing manuscripts written by nonnative English speakers, disclosure of conflicts of interest by authors and editors, and plagiarism. Similarly, in spring 2016, online courses and webinars offered by the Editorial Freelancers Association were on topics such as developmental editing in fiction, basic copyediting skills, numeracy skills for editors, and basic business skills for freelancers. Past courses by the organization have taught the use of such tools as the Evernote application for managing a freelance business, Word macros for automating routine editing tasks, WordPress for building a freelancer’s business website, and social media platforms for marketing an editing business.





PUBLISHERS VERSUS AUTHORS AS CLIENTS


For freelancers, editing for publishers can feel both very similar to and very different from working directly with authors. With both types of clients, it’s necessary to build good working relationships based on clear and appropriate communication, tact, and mutual respect. And with both types, freelancers must ask for the types of projects they want to work on and for the fees they want to be paid, instead of hoping that clients will read their minds. But there are many more differences than similarities.





Publishers


Publishers generally have settled on their own definitions for various levels of editing, and they instruct freelancers on what level is necessary for each project. Along with good two-way communication between publisher and freelancer, these definitions increase the chances that freelancers will do the work that the publishers have in mind rather than the level that the freelancer thinks is necessary, which might blow the project’s budget and annoy both the publisher and the author.

Publishers are more likely than individual authors to insist on specific fees rather than being open to freelancers’ desire to negotiate them. In addition, publishers often are unwilling to issue payment on invoices until at least thirty days after invoice date, and when the US economy (or their business) isn’t doing well, they sometimes change that period to forty-five, sixty, or even ninety days. Some publishers require freelance editors to sign a formulaic contract for each project, but others use the instructions in their cover memos and emails as contracts.

Publishers also act as a buffer between authors and freelancers, since they usually tell their freelancers not to communicate directly with authors. This arrangement offers freelancers the chance to focus just on editing rather than on soothing the souls of authors with poor interpersonal skills who take out their frustration about the publishing process on their editors. Freelance editors expect that publishers will stand up to such authors on their behalf. However, the involvement of publisher staff members as go-betweens means that it may take much longer for freelancers to get answers to their questions than when working directly with authors.





Authors


In an increasing number of situations, authors may need to hire freelance editors directly:

• when they are self-publishing and do not have access to a publisher’s editorial staff to polish their writing

• when their manuscript needs developmental help

• when they are subject-matter experts but good writing is not one of their strengths

• when they are nonnative English speakers who have been asked to contribute chapters to a book and their manuscript requires language polishing

• when they are unsure of their skill in putting together a book proposal for submission to a publisher

• when they have a book contract with a publisher but their manuscript needs more attention than the publisher’s acquisition editor can provide

• when their agent has said that their manuscript needs an editor’s touch



Unlike publishers, authors may not be aware that there is more than one kind of editing that freelancers can do (developmental or substantive editing; technical editing; light, medium, and heavy copyediting), so freelancers may have to spend some time educating them in order to get appropriate fees. In addition, freelancers will have to spend a good deal of time clarifying with authors what outcomes the authors want from editing. It’s best for both freelancer and author that the results of such discussion be described explicitly in a project-parameter document that both parties sign. If there are disagreements later when the editor is deep into editing, that document will help settle issues. If necessary, it can always be revised to reflect the evolution of the work required, and then both parties should sign it again. Having project parameters set out also prevents project scope creep, a situation that means freelancers do more work than planned and earn less money than expected.

Individual authors are more likely than publishers are to want written contracts. If authors don’t ask for contracts, freelancers should provide them, for their own protection and for the protection of their authors. Also, authors are generally quicker to pay than publishers are. After all, it can take longer to push an invoice through a publisher’s accounting department than it does for an individual author to write a check or send an electronic payment. Although in general publishers have larger budgets than authors do for contracting with freelancers, this is changing because of the popularity of crowdfunding publishing tasks, including editing, through personal online fundraising pages. Authors who have already been published are sometimes willing to pay higher editing fees than publishers are, because they’ve learned through experience that a well-edited book or article pulls in more readers than a sloppily written one does. Authors are thus more heavily invested in good editing, whereas publishers generally want to keep editorial fees in a narrow range, regardless of the depth of editing needed.

A freelancer working directly with an author with objectionable personality traits can decide to “fire” that author, whereas a freelancer working with a publisher can’t. That autonomy can be satisfying and can cut down on freelancers’ expenditures on medications for heartburn and depression (figuratively and literally). But far more fulfilling is the joy of working closely with an author to make the manuscript the best that it can be. Such a relationship spurs personal and professional growth for both parties.





CONCLUSION: THE PROS AND CONS OF FREELANCING


Freelancing has changed so much over time that it has become a viable career for many editors instead of something that only a few choose. Some editors may be forced by layoffs to become freelancers, but many more editors now choose self-employment deliberately. In fact, because of budget cuts necessitating staff reductions, it is the wide availability of freelance editors that permits publishers to still offer editing to their authors. Unlike staff members, freelancers are paid only for each project they do; publishers do not have to maintain employee-style benefits year-round for freelancers.

It is not necessarily automatic anymore for all editors to spend time working in-house for publishers before becoming freelancers. Professional associations for a wide variety of editorial niches offer networking, training, and listings of project opportunities. There are online communities that allow freelancers to learn from one another and market their services without traveling to client meetings. Technological advances have eliminated the need for working face to face in shared offices, allowed for freelancers to afford their own work equipment, and sped up publishing processes.

Editors who are considering going freelance must be honest about their desires and their abilities. If they freelance, they will have two jobs rather than one: they must edit, and they must run a business. If they wait to be handed projects the way employees are, they will go broke quickly. Are they self-starters, or do they need externally provided structure? If they aren’t good at setting schedules for themselves, they should remain employees. Do they chafe under an office chain of command and so need more autonomy? If they do, they will want the freelancer’s ability to turn down projects and authors or clients. Do they need frequent face-to-face contact with colleagues, or are they comfortable with a lot of alone time? Yes, the internet makes video visits and quick written discussions possible, so that makes freelancing less lonely than it used to be, but those who crave in-person contact should remain employees. Do they want an employer to provide opportunities for continuing education, or are they willing to seek and pay for it themselves? Education that freelancers pay for can be tax deductible in the United States. Do they want an employer to provide job equipment and keep their computer running well, or are they okay with serving as their own information-technology expert or purchasing such expertise? Freelancers have to find ways to deal with the feast-or-famine cycles of self-employment: Can they put savings aside, and can they market themselves consistently to decrease gaps between projects? And finally, do they want an employer to provide health-care insurance for them, or are they willing and able to take on that tax-deductible expense themselves?

I’ve been self-employed for more than two decades, and I wouldn’t give it up for an in-house job unless financial survival for my family depended on it. I love getting up in the morning and setting my own schedule; not having to attend nonproductive in-house meetings called by an employer; being exempt from someone else’s dress code; and taking breaks in my schedule without anyone’s permission when I am ill, have errands or personal appointments, must provide care for a family member, or just need a mental-health day. I enjoy running a successful business of my own and being known in the publishing industry by name as an expert instead of being an anonymous employee. Most of all, I take satisfaction in building and maintaining excellent relationships with my corporate clients and my authors.





25


THE SELF-PUBLISHER AS SELF-EDITOR


ARIELLE ECKSTUT AND DAVID HENRY STERRY*

If you are surprised, confused, or insulted by the idea of a chapter on self-publishing in a book that is devoted to the craft of editing, we implore you to read at least the two following paragraphs before you skip ahead. Yes, most of the other essays in this book focus on how editors in publishing houses do their jobs. But in today’s rapidly changing and ever more democratic book marketplace, it’s increasingly likely that your publishing house may have a staff of one: you! You and you alone may decide to become an author by publishing your own work. Or you may decide to set up shop as an editor who helps those who self-publish, after a career in traditional publishing or otherwise.

Self-publishing and editing have always had a rocky relationship. Or sadly, often no relationship at all. Too many writers self-publish books with misspelled dedications, sentences that should be arrested by the grammar police, narrative arcs that feel more like straight lines. Above any other failing—bad covers, bright white paper, terrible titles—the lack of editing has consistently distinguished most self-published books from traditionally published ones. Or rather, undistinguished them.

We are publishing professionals who strongly believe in self-publishing and want self-published authors to succeed, and very little makes us as sad as a self-published book in need of a stiff edit. The inverse is true as well. Very little has brought us as much relief and excitement as a well-edited self-published book. It sings PROFESSIONAL. It gives us hope that this is an author who wants to and can succeed.

When you self-publish, of course, the editing responsibility falls to you, the self in self-publishing. But what exactly does it mean to edit a self-published book? Is it up to the author to edit his or her own work? Should she depend on beta readers or writers’ groups? Should he hire outside help? The answer to all these questions is yes.





SELF-EDITING


Whether you’re self-publishing or not, self-editing is necessary unless you happen to be one of those rare geniuses who is able to spit out a perfect first draft. We’ve yet to meet someone who fits this bill. The editing process for self-publishers is different from that with agents or editors in that you don’t get professional feedback on your draft unless you seek it out yourself. Editorial feedback helps you know if you’ve successfully completed the self-edit stage, whether you have more self-editing to do, or whether you’ve lost all perspective and need to hire someone. It’s impossible for you to see your book objectively. It simply can’t be done. So once you’ve absorbed all the wisdom in this book and edited your manuscript until you just can’t look at it one more second, it’s time to get some outside help. Just one question before you do: have you read your book out loud yet?

Reading your entire book out loud is a crucial step in the editing process that most people simply don’t take. You won’t believe what you hear that you weren’t able to see when you finished your “final” edit. We’re not just talking about fiction here. We’re big believers that nonfiction should be every bit as interesting and entertaining as a novel. That’s why we read our five-hundred-page reference book The Essential Guide to Getting Your Book Published out loud three times before we handed it in to our editor. And every time we do an updated edition, we read the whole thing again from cover to cover, out loud.

It takes us about three full days to do so. It could be considered an excellent form of torture down in literary hell, but there’s a very good reason for the slog. It never ceases to amaze us how the awkwardness of a sentence may conceal itself completely until it has to pass between your lips. Most of the time when we stumble on a sentence, it’s because the sentence isn’t as good as it could be. It doesn’t roll off the tongue. Repetition becomes obvious—on both the micro level (for example, we found we were using the word altogether altogether too often) and the macro level (the book lagged and sagged in the middle). Opportunities for jokes, interesting wordplay, more abundant storytelling present themselves. Which is all to say, reading your book out loud will make your book better. Period.





WRITERS’ GROUPS AND BETA READERS


Before you spend a dime on hiring editorial assistance, it’s best to have the help of a writer’s group or beta readers. Let us break these out for you.

Writers’ groups. We can’t tell you how many people we’ve seen get successfully published (self or traditionally) with the help of a writers’ group. It’s especially helpful if you’re in a group with people writing in a similar bookstore category. The feedback, the forced deadlines, the networking all feed a writer’s career. On the editing front, group members can give you crucial information about what’s working and what’s not. Sure, there will be big mouths who harp on the ridiculous, and other members whose taste you don’t share. But if everyone says your ending stinks, well, your ending stinks.

Beta readers. The beta in “beta readers” comes from the software world and refers to the phase when a product is complete but still has errors that may or may not be known to the developers but that need to be fixed before it can go to market. Beta readers can be your saving grace—or your yes-men who do nothing to help you. It all depends on how you use them.

Most people, when asked to read your book, will tell you, “It was great!” This kind of feedback will get you nowhere. That’s why it’s helpful to develop a sheet of questions to hand out before or after your betas complete their reads. Some people like to hand out questions beforehand so that their readers can think about the issues you’ve brought up while they read. Other people don’t like to put ideas into their readers’ heads and want them to have an unbiased experience during the reading process. But either way, you want to give your readers some prompts. The questions should range from the very general to the very specific. If you’re writing fiction or narrative nonfiction you could ask everything from Were there points in the book where you felt bored and wanted to skip ahead? to Did you find it unrealistic when Aunt Tallulah revealed she spent her youth as a spy for the CIA? With practical nonfiction you could ask everything from Were there points in the book where you didn’t understand what I was explaining? to Was it going too far to ask my readers to videotape themselves sitting silently in front of a mirror for ninety minutes? The point here is to get a range of responses that will serve in subsequent edits. It’s also helpful to get multiple answers to the same questions. If a majority of readers found the same section dull or felt uncomfortable with the ninety-minute videotaping, chances are that other readers will feel the same. If you get very diverse answers to the same question, then you might want to stick with what you’ve got or take what speaks to you from the various answers. Often someone else’s criticism will initiate a creative spark that might lead you down an entirely new path. But it might be a breakthrough path that you never could’ve gotten to without the feedback that sparked your new idea.

Who makes for ideal beta readers? Probably not your grandma and your best friend—unless they happen to be avid readers of your genre. You can’t give your romance novel to your little brother who only reads books about poker. You want to find readers who live and breathe your particular kind of book. If you don’t know any of these people, let us introduce you to a cool new invention called the World Wide Web. When in doubt, always go see your librarian or local independent bookseller, which gets us to the next category: People you can pay to read your book.





PROFESSIONAL READERS


Between us, we are the authors of twenty-five books. We almost always pay an editor before we even turn our books in to our agents or publishers. And we always pay an editor when we self-publish. We are going to get into how to find and hire an editor, but first we want to delve into a gray area of editorial help, professional readers. The people we typically pay as professional readers are librarians and booksellers—and not just any librarians and booksellers. As with beta readers, you want to find those who specialize in your category of writing. Find the bookseller who buys your category for her store. Find the librarian who is known for his love and deep knowledge of your subject. If you’re writing a children’s book, for example, you will be hard-pressed to find anyone more literate in nearly any section of the children’s shelf than a children’s or school librarian.

But a professional reader shouldn’t be limited to these two distinguished groups. If you’re writing a business book, you might look to colleagues in your field. If you’re writing about a local issue, then a local reporter might be the perfect match. University professors, high school teachers, food critics (if you’re writing a cookbook!) are all great potential professional readers.





OUTSIDE EDITORS


If you have the budget, an outside professional editor can be your most important investment in your book. If you don’t have the budget, then you should consider waiting to self-publish until you do. Thankfully, we live in a world where Kickstarter campaigns can fund a penniless entrepreneur very quickly, if you have a persuasive enough pitch. That’s what all self-publishers are, after all. When you take on the role of publisher, you are creating a startup where you’re wearing all the hats of a publisher’s staff—editor, publicist, marketer, salesperson, and more. The problem is, most self-publishers do not have any training in these areas, and that’s why it’s essential to have the money to hire outside help. Editor is number one on the list.

How do you find a great editor? A person doesn’t have to pass any kind of test or get a license to call herself an editor. All she has to do is say she is one. But don’t be fooled by a shiny, sparkly website or slick, enticing come-ons—especially if the business or person promises publication. In the world of self-publishing, there are, unfortunately, many shysters who are just waiting to rip you off. They whisper sweet nothings in your ear and then deliver exactly that: nothing. And they’re not actually sweet.

So before you hire anyone, you must do your research. Are there any complaints about the person/business online? Are there positive reviews? Who exactly is going to edit your book? What is that person’s background? Was she an editor at Random House for twenty-five years or a copywriter for a gaming company during college? If she was an editor at Random House for twenty-five years, did she edit your category of book?

Ideally, you’re looking for an editor with deep experience in your particular category. The editor doesn’t have to have been at a big-name house. There are numerous amazing independent publishers out there, but no matter where an editor has worked, he needs—let us say this again—experience editing books like yours. Other important questions for potential editors are these: (1) Can you talk to their clients? Best to first check out their client list and ask to speak with people whose books look similar to yours. (2) Will they edit a small sample of your work before you hand over your check? (3) Will they put fees, deliverables, and deadlines in writing? The reason for this last question is that there are a number of different kinds of edits, with different deliverables associated with them, and you want to know exactly what you’re getting, for how much, and when it will land in your inbox. These different edits break down as follows (for more detail on each kind, see other chapters in this book).





Developmental Edit


A developmental edit usually occurs fairly early in the process; the vast majority of writers need this for their manuscripts before even contemplating a line edit. It is also significantly cheaper than a line edit, because it’s less time consuming.

The purpose of a developmental edit is to evaluate the big picture of your book. For fiction, that’s everything from pacing to character arc to plot to voice and more, and for nonfiction, everything from voice to clarity to structure to marketability and more. A developmental editor typically delivers an editorial letter, and he may annotate individual pages too. Then you should have the chance to have a conversation with your editor to go over any questions you may have. This is one of the most fruitful parts of the process. Some of our best ideas come from questioning feedback from an editor. Often when we say “Yes, but this is what we meant!” it’s a signal that what we intended is not clear in the document.

If you start with a line edit, much of it may become moot after the development work, which may well call for major changes throughout your manuscript. Better to pay less money to learn about the big issues and seek out a line edit only after any problems with structure, character, and voice have been discovered and addressed.





Line Edit and Copyedit


A line edit dials down to the paragraph/sentence/word level. As we said, it’s usually a much more expensive job than a developmental edit. A line editor will go through the pages of your book with a fine-toothed comb, looking for dialogue that feels awkward, sentences that don’t quite work, repetition, and more. Obviously this happens when the bulk of the work in terms of plot, character, beginnings, middles, and ends is done. It’s not that a line edit can’t address the bigger picture. But in most publishing houses an editor simply won’t do a line edit until the bigger issues are addressed, so as not to have to do the same work twice. It’s smart to stick with that order in self-publishing too.

Line edits may or may not come with an editorial letter. But be sure that the fee includes time for you to meet in person or talk on the phone once you’ve had a chance to digest the edits.

Often the same person could do both a developmental edit and line edit, if that’s what you decide to pay for, but you will also need a copyeditor. Copyeditors are the grammarians, the fact-checkers, the formatting gurus, the identifiers of repetitive words and phrases. They are the ones who make a book as smooth as a fresh jar of Skippy. The one instance where you might not need a separate copyeditor is if you hire someone to do a line edit who does a copyedit simultaneously. Some people have both skills and can pull this off, though it’s rare.





Proofreading


Last but not least, there’s the proofreader. Though not technically an editor, the proofreader is the eagle-eyed person who makes sure that any silly typos along the way get fixed, that a weird line break gets unbroken, that a chunk of text that got inadvertently removed gets put back. It may sound like overkill, but please listen: the last thing you want is to open your precious book that you’ve spent thousands of hours on, and possibly thousands of dollars, only to find out that you dedicated it to your beloved moth instead of your beloved mother.





Taking Criticism


The self-published author is in a unique position when it comes to taking criticism. When you have an agent or editor, you’re often forced to take criticism whether you want it or not. When you self-publish, it’s easy to ignore criticism because you can. Here’s our advice: don’t. The ability to take criticism is the mark of the professional writer as opposed to the amateur. This isn’t to say that you have to make every little change that is suggested. That would be silly. Take the time you need to let the feedback sink in and to get past your natural defensive reaction. Imagine you had a traditional publisher and the information was coming from your editor there, or your agent. How would you respond if this was the case?

For those of you who are not inclined to look outside yourself for editing, we beg you to seek the help you need and open yourself up to outside critiques. The point of writing a book is to have readers. The sooner you bring readers on board, the sooner you get a feel for what resonates and what does not. Yes, it can be deeply uncomfortable, infuriating, humbling. But if you want people you don’t know to actually read your book, criticism is necessary. It will make you a better writer and your book a better book.





ALL THOSE OTHER HATS


As you’ve read throughout this book, editors do much more than just “editing.” In a publishing house the editor is also responsible for acquisition decisions and for supplying a lot of marketing intelligence—positioning the title in the marketplace, writing tipsheets and copy, coming up with publicity hooks, etc. The self-publisher is also, of course, responsible for all of that. And just as a lot of self-publishers don’t edit themselves as well as they should, many of them aren’t very adept at the design, publicity, marketing and sales sides of the job either.

Just as we’ve suggested getting help with the editorial side of the self-publishing process, we can’t leave you without saying the same about these other jobs. If you happen to be a graphic designer, then you’re golden when it comes to the cover and the interior layout. But if you’re not a professional publicist as well, then you probably don’t know how to effectively reach out to the media (which, by the way, is even harder when you self-publish).

When you decide to self-publish, you are making the choice to become an entrepreneur. And the more you understand about the business of publishing, the more success you will find. But first you need a great book. And that’s why self-publishing begins with self-editing.





26


A NEW AGE OF DISCOVERY


THE EDITOR’S ROLE IN A CHANGING PUBLISHING INDUSTRY


JANE FRIEDMAN*

In 2013 Bowker, the bibliographic information service, released an eye-opening infographic on retail book sales in the United States. It showed that—regardless of print or digital format—between 2010 and 2012, book sales shifted dramatically to online retail, away from physical retail. In 2010, chain bookstores accounted for 31.5 percent of all book sales; by 2012 that figure had dropped to 18.7 percent, partly due to the bankruptcy of Borders.1

While the growth—or stagnation—of e-book sales is a topic often highlighted in publishing trend headlines and tends to prompt the loudest debate, the bigger challenge for most publishers is not the shift to e-book format but the increasing importance of online sales and the ways books get discovered in a landscape dominated by digital media. For decades the bookstore has been the primary means of book discovery, but it’s becoming less central to how books get marketed and sold. In 2007, Barnes & Noble retail sales peaked, and store count peaked in 2008. By 2016, Barnes & Noble sales had dropped by more than 22 percent and store locations by nearly 12 percent. And even those figures don’t offer the full picture of how much bookstore sales have declined, given that Barnes & Noble’s overall sales have been driven by growth of nonbook merchandise, such as educational toys and games.2 Independent bookstore growth has been much celebrated in the meantime, but its percentage of sales is minuscule in comparison to the growth of online retail—particularly Amazon.

In 2016, industry experts estimated that half of all books in the United States were sold through Amazon across all formats.3 For e-book sales only, Amazon is believed to account for as much as 80 percent of all US book sales. Those figures have certainly only increased over time: in 2015, Amazon represented 51 percent of all growth in online retail and 24 percent of growth across all retail.4 It’s hard to overstate Amazon’s effect on the book business at every level, including sales, marketing, and distribution, not to mention its role in shaping the e-book market. The launch of the Kindle in 2007 changed the face of book retailing forever, not only changing how books get sold and at what price but also opening up the field to self-published authors to get their work to market easily and profitably.

As book sales increasingly move online, different marketing dynamics take hold, such as search engine optimization (SEO), algorithm-driven recommendations, and social media conversations. The efficiency and accuracy of online search—and analyzing how to boost online word of mouth—becomes ever more critical as the number of books published each year continues to increase exponentially. For nearly their entire history, large publishers have focused their sales and marketing energies on servicing distributors, booksellers, and other businesses; now they’re being compelled to develop the infrastructure and skills of direct-to-consumer companies and sell to readers directly.

While the number of published titles each year has been increasing steadily ever since the printing press came into existence—and especially during the emergence of desktop publishing in the 1980s—the title count skyrocketed after the e-book became a viable consumer format. From traditional publishers, the number of titles produced in 2001 was around 135,000. By 2013 that number was just over 300,000. Compare those numbers to what happened in the self-publishing market. Between 2006 and 2011, the number of titles tripled, with nearly a quarter million titles produced in 2011 alone.5 By 2013 that number had risen to nearly half a million. In September 2012, publishing consultant Thad McIllroy estimated that more than fifty-six thousand e-books were released for the US Kindle in a matter of thirty days.

So not only are traditional publishers competing with each other, but they’re also competing with the proliferation of self-publishing authors, cottage-industry presses, and many forms of custom publishing output. It’s possible today for an author or a very small press to publish books that are on an even footing with those of traditional houses because they have equal access to distribution at Amazon, the number-one retailer of books. Any business or institution—such as a consulting firm, a school, or a church—can feasibly start its own imprint, publish works that are in line with its mission and values, and distribute or sell them to a target audience it likely knows better than a traditional publisher does. This doesn’t preclude the possibility and likelihood of partnerships between traditional publishers and institutions (as there are now), but certainly it’s not a requirement for success to have such a partnership, particularly if the content works best in a digital environment. Industry consultant Mike Shatzkin has called the trend “atomization”: “Publishing will become a function of many entities, not a capability reserved to a few insiders who can call themselves an industry. . . . This is the atomization of publishing, the dispersal of publishing decisions and the origination of published material from far and wide. In a pretty short time, we will see an industry with a completely different profile than it has had for the past couple of hundred years.”6

As author Clay Shirky has said, it is no great or important thing simply to publish something in the digital era. You can publish at the click of a button. The difficult work lies in getting attention in what he calls a world of “cognitive surplus”—the societal phenomenon where people now have free time to pursue all sorts of creative and collaborative activities, including writing. And they also have access to free tools to instantly distribute their work and make it public. Thus the avalanche of published materials we all now have to sift through.

Therefore the overwhelming problem for publishers, and ultimately for editors, is how to gain attention for their works in a world of dwindling bookstore retail space, and how to create sustained and meaningful word of mouth—all while keeping current with the technological advances and the shifting landscape of social media.


In a talk at 2013 BookExpo America, Phil Madans from Hachette said, “If you don’t want your books to be found ever, use the Fiction: General category as your BISAC code.”

If that comment had been made ten years earlier, no one would have much understood why they should care about BISAC codes—the book industry’s standard set of subject categories—as long as a title had one and it was accurate. Since 2010, everyone cares. BISAC codes are just one of the many details in the larger landscape known as metadata—perhaps the biggest buzzword in publishing-insider circles since sales shifted to online retail. Metadata is all the information that describes a book and helps it come up in appropriate online searches; in some databases there may be more than one hundred fields for a publisher to use to define and describe each book, everything from its physical specifications to story themes and settings to author biographical information.

Metadata has different purposes depending on the context, but it’s a hot-button concern because of its crucial role in helping readers discover books in the online shopping environment, where there is an unlimited selection of books but no personal guidance for the consumer. When readers run a search or browse titles, what they’re shown is based on recommendation algorithms, and such algorithms are partly driven by the book’s metadata.

In a talk at Frankfurt Book Fair’s CONTEC 2013 conference, called “The Future of Metadata,” German publishing expert Ronald Schild emphasized the need for semantic analysis, which relates to identifying the “core concept” of a book. Without semantic analysis, recommendations are less valuable; for example, your average reader is not searching for books by ISBNs or trim size but by themes, such as LGBT coming-of-age story, underground activity in communist Czechoslovakia, or other intellectual or emotional touchstones. But up until the growth of online retail, publishers had done very little thinking about this type of marketing.

One of the most fascinating aspects of the discussion is how much metadata can affect the sales of fiction. Conventional wisdom might lead one to believe it’s most important for information-driven books, but a Nielsen study indicates just the opposite.7 When publishers provide specific, detailed information about their novels instead of broad generic labels (which don’t help readers), sales jump. For example, more readers are attracted to a title tagged with “historical suspense” “19th century” “London” “female protagonist” than to one simply labeled “mystery.” The same discussions have also been happening in the self-publishing community, where authors have discovered that being meticulous with their categories, keywords, and summary descriptions have resulted in better visibility and thus better sales.

What do these trends mean for editors? To be the best possible advocates for their books, editors need to think about this larger picture throughout the book’s development, starting in the acquisition stage. No one can count on quality bubbling to the top by itself—not that it ever did, but quality can’t be discovered if the right readership is ignorant that it exists. Brian O’Leary, in his essay “Context, Not Container,” makes a powerful argument that publishers can’t focus on content or container (that is, the delivery format) alone; context is just as important. “Context” is the reason readers are looking for content (or a book) in the first place. Are they looking for a great beach read? Are they looking for recipes for entertaining over the holidays? Are they looking for personal essays about fathers by daughters? New startups in the publishing space often start with context first: solving a problem or satisfying a need that exists in the market. O’Leary writes:

We treat readers as if their needs can be defined by containers. But in a digital world, search takes place before physical sampling, much more often than the reverse. Readers may at times look for a specific product, but more often they search for an answer, a solution, a spark that turns into an interest and perhaps a purchase. Publishers are in the business of linking content to markets, but we’re hamstrung at search because we’ve made context the last thing we think about. When content scarcity was the norm, we could live with a minimum of context. In a limited market, our editors became skilled in making decisions about what would be published. Now, in an era of abundance, editors have inherited a new and fundamentally different role: figuring out how “what is published” will be discovered. To serve that new role, we must reverse our publishing paradigm. We need to start with context and develop and maintain rich, linked, digital content.8



Figuring out context doesn’t begin with metadata; it ends with metadata and filling out the fields appropriately when listing a book at wholesaler and distributor databases, a task often done collaboratively by editorial and marketing staff. Peter McCarthy, former vice president of marketing at Penguin, has argued that there are far more potential readers for each book than are ever reached, and that if publishers are to keep their value to authors, they need to be the best at connecting authors and titles to the most appropriate readers. When he develops a marketing campaign, he uses a range of data-driven tools to help him understand how “ordinary” readers (not publishing insiders) go about searching for things—and to make sure those people find the right book. For example, he might use a combination of reviews and conversations on Amazon, Goodreads, and LibraryThing to see how books get described or grouped together by readers. By doing some friendly “stalking” of reader conversations through social media and community sites, he might discover that people who love The Bachelor also love a very particular type of contemporary romance, which leads to ideas for how to better reach those readers and talk about a specific author or book.

One question that often bothers astute industry observers: do readers really have trouble finding books, or is discoverability a problem of the publisher? A reader’s need for entertainment or information may be satisfied by many different books. The challenge for the publisher is to get the reader to buy its particular book: how to make one title stand out among many.

One strategy common in the self-publishing community is setting prices low (even at zero), which creates less purchase friction, attracts price-conscious buyers, and encourages a large number of readers to buy or download a title. However, this can be a double-edged sword, encouraging readers to load up with many more books than they could ever read, and reducing demand in the future. Still, traditional publishers are finding that a dependable way to increase the success of a new release is to offer another title, by the same author, at discount or for free in the immediate weeks leading up to publication, to create a rising curve of interest and attention. Discounting with a specific plan and strategy for marketing future work helps cut through the noise while retaining value.

In what are still, arguably, the early days of online retail and e-book marketing, self-publishing authors have been more nimble and experimental than traditional publishers in their efforts to reach readers through digital media. The most sophisticated and successful have even turned down lucrative publication deals offered by traditional houses. Editors must now bid for authors not just against their peers but against the greater profits and control that self-publishing offers. Best-selling author Sylvia Day, speaking at a 2013 industry conference, said she expects a comprehensive marketing plan that covers everything she’s not doing herself. To pass muster with Day, a publisher’s plan must hit a market she’s not already reaching. “[Publishers] need to find me a new audience, to broaden my audience. As far as digital is concerned, [publishers] cannot compete with what I’m doing on my own. You have to knock my socks off with a brilliant marketing plan to be my publisher.”


One of the unique effects of the digitization of the industry has been the call for traditional publishers to prove their value to authors. Anyone in publishing who doesn’t see this as a growing problem might reflect on (1) the growing number of authors who are successful on their own, (2) the number of authors who have made exclusive deals with Amazon and therefore have deprioritized physical bookstore distribution, and (3) the growing footprint of Amazon’s US publishing program. On this last point, while seen as a failure by some because it doesn’t yet attract A-list authors, as of 2015, Amazon Publishing included fourteen imprints and more than twelve hundred titles; it had two thousand new titles planned for 2016. Its translation arm, AmazonCrossing, is now the number-one source of translations in the United States, and it has established foreign-language divisions as well.

In a development inconceivable even a few years ago, just about every head of every English-language publishing house now talks about the value it brings to authors and how it focuses on serving them. In 2015 at the BookExpo America industry trade show, Bloomsbury’s Richard Charkin said, “The next few years will be about looking after our authors.” But after an author gets his feet under him, gains credibility, and builds a direct relationship with his audience (a requirement for many authors to get published in the first place), of what use is the traditional publisher to an established author? It can’t be just about publishing any longer. Anyone can publish, and publishing something doesn’t guarantee attention like it once did.

Michael Bhaskar, in his book The Content Machine, argues that a publisher’s value must come from its success at filtering and amplifying. Filtering, or curation to use another buzzword, means the careful selection of material that fits the mission or vision of the press and delivers value to its readers. Amplification is the ability to make that material visible and known to the target market. Prior to the internet, simply to print or to publish a book used to mean amplification. It was more difficult to publish something, and fewer things were published, so it was meaningful whenever someone invested in producing a book. That’s no longer the case. So now a publisher has to find other ways of amplifying.

If a publisher is concerned about its potential to amplify a given title from the outset, then the acquisitions process should take this into account. Checking the sales of “comp titles” is the traditional way of assessing a project’s potential, but now acquisitions research should also take the form of SEO and keyword analysis, so publishers can identify what people are searching for and quantify demand for a particular book concept or title. Online publications and magazines already use SEO and keyword analysis to determine what gets published, and such analytics have become extremely rich and detailed. Book editors and publishers will need to take advantage of these tools.

Acquisitions based on SEO and keyword metrics can sound deadening and offensive to anyone who works in publishing, especially those who believe that creative products are unique and aesthetic judgments trump number-crunching. But the two don’t necessarily have to be in conflict, especially at publishers where the two key functions of filtering and amplification have a happy marriage. And when these two functions mesh, it increases value to the author as well as the publisher. So what does that look like?

Editors and publishers must push themselves to become leaders of the community of readers and writers who have matching interests. Publishers can add value and earn credibility within a community—through the act of publishing of course, but also through other forms of leadership and support that go beyond print publishing and extend into events, services, grants, fellowships, reading groups, and more.

For years, publishers have known that they need to build more relationships directly with readers, rather than relying on bookstores or e-tailers as intermediaries. The latter approach has led to an industry that has very limited ability to market direct to consumer, which is where a huge part of Amazon’s power lies. In 2015 the chief digital officer of HarperCollins, Chantal Restivo-Alessi, told a group of industry colleagues, “Marketing has been the division most impacted by the need to change. There has been the change from analog to digital, but also the need to transform from trade marketing to relationship marketing”—that is, from marketing oriented toward industry partners to marketing aimed at earning the recognition and trust of individual consumers. The mission of community building is now getting under way in publishing circles: developing relationships with readers in a way that doesn’t depend on large tech companies. But it requires intimate knowledge of and respect for communities of readers, combined with creativity and imagination in serving them. Publishers that survive, whether they focus on traditional print or on digital media, will need to become indispensable to the communities they serve.

While at one time a publisher might have become indispensable by delivering quality ideas and stories, a publisher who does that today—and nothing more—can be seen as merely adding to the burden all readers now face. There are too many wonderful things to read and too few signposts to what’s worth our time. Thus the publisher needs to be a beacon, to offer a strong signal amidst all the noise and organize ideas, content, and stories within an identifiable and useful context.

Another term for this in a publishing context is verticalization. Rather than having a broad, generalist publishing plan across many imprints that don’t have meaningful brands for readers, publishers should create imprints—or at least online communities—that have the potential to develop a loyal fan base around a single theme, idea, or genre. One of the oldest examples of this in traditional publishing is Harlequin, a name that equates to romance in the reading community. Other long-time examples include Rodale (healthy living), O’Reilly Media (technology), and Hay House (New Thought self-help). Some newer examples include Suvudu from Random House (science fiction and fantasy), Heroes & Heartbreakers from Macmillan (romance), and Cool Springs Press (home and gardening).

The marketing relationship with readers is just the start. A whole other level of engagement and interaction takes place when the community is involved in how and what is published—when fans may even serve as early readers and editors. Again, this is an area where self-published authors and the online publishing community has already been active and experimenting, ahead of traditional publishers, with collaborative models.

Some of the most provocative thinking in this area has come from Bob Stein at the Institute for the Future of the Book. His argument is that reading has always been a social activity and that our idea of literature as a solitary pursuit is fairly recent, something that arrived with widespread literacy. Now, as we move from the printed page to the screen—to networked environments—the social aspect of reading and writing returns to the foreground. Once this shift happens, we see something very interesting: the lines begin to blur between reader and writer. Stein suggests that authors will take on the added role of moderators and leaders of communities and as designers of complex worlds for readers to explore in fiction.

In the nonfiction arena, there are numerous examples of this social and collaborative aspect—the most iconic being Wikipedia, one of the grandest social writing and reading projects ever born. For some types of projects, crowdsourcing has become a replacement for development and content editing. Sourcebooks, a trade publisher, has experimented with this kind of authoring and editing process, which they call their “Agile Publishing Model.” People in the technology world are already very familiar with this type of iterative framework, which makes content available faster, gets real-time feedback from the target audience, and shapes the final product through collaboration. CEO Dominique Raccah says, “The traditional publishing model—long schedules, creating in a vacuum, lack of involvement with the readers of the end product—drives some authors crazy. [The collaborative] model is a great fit for experts who are highly immersed in their field and where the field is evolving rapidly.” Sourcebooks employed an agile model for Evolution Shift by David Houle. Other authors who have used unconventional means of writing their books (sometimes developing them publicly on blogs) include Chris Anderson and Dan Gillmor (Mediactive).

On the fiction or narrative side, the online community Wattpad and the burgeoning world of fan fiction represent potential models. Fan fiction is when readers take well-known characters and story worlds, such as Harry Potter or Star Wars, and create new stories for their own enjoyment and to share within the community. E. L. James’s best-selling novel 50 Shades of Grey began as a piece of fan fiction based on Stephenie Meyer’s Twilight and was posted as a work in progress on a public fan fiction website. It gathered fans and feedback over time before being formally published.

Of course, one of the challenges of fan fiction is that to become a successful commercial project, it has to stand on its own as a new work and avoid claims of copyright infringement. Amazon recognized an opportunity in this challenge. In 2013 it launched Kindle Worlds to allow fan fiction writers to start publishing and earning money from their fan works through formalized licensing deals.

Thus far, however, activity on Kindle Worlds is fairly minimal when compared to a site like Wattpad, which has a user base of more than fifty million. While fan fiction is one of the most predominant areas of activity on the site, Wattpad is more broadly a community of people who love to read and write stories. Those stories are delivered primarily to mobile devices in serialized form—that is, in installments. If the fast growth of Wattpad and its youthful audience is any indicator, this type of interaction may shape the future of publishing.

One of the reasons Wattpad is attractive to emerging writers is that it offers a real chance to directly reach and grow a readership, even though it means giving away the writing for free. Wattpad can ping a devoted readership whenever a new story or installment gets posted. Unlike traditional publishing or even self-publishing through Amazon, where authors have limited insight into their readers and no means to have a conversation with them, Wattpad offers a platform for ongoing interaction. And Wattpad’s larger vision is just that: to foster a stronger connection between the reader and writer.

There’s another motivation for writers to use Wattpad. It can be very daunting to write a book, but it’s not so hard to write a chapter. By building an audience and getting feedback right away (from ordinary folks—not editors), a writer may be encouraged to continue and build on his efforts rather than giving up when faced with a slump or self-doubt.

While serials and fan fiction are sometimes dismissed by industry insiders (and others) as low-quality work that won’t affect how traditional publishing operates, these markets might be in a position to do exactly that. Wattpad delivers a social reading experience that some consider superior to that of the traditional e-book. Eric Hellman, an industry expert who specializes in economic models for e-books, wrote:

It’s worth paying close attention to the fan fiction sites. After all, 2012’s biggest revenue engine for the book industry, 50 Shades, was a repackaged fanfic. On an iPad with a decent internet connection, the fanfic sites work better than ePubs. . . . They deliver content in smaller, more addictive chunks, and they integrate popular culture MUCH more effectively than books do. . . . The authors are responsive and deeply connected to readers; they often ARE the readers! There’s a fanfic site to appeal to every reader.9



While some career authors—who likely had to improve on their own and struggle for approval from the gatekeepers—may believe that emerging authors are publishing too early and too quickly without regard for quality, Wattpad offers a different model of how to develop as a writer. Authors benefit from getting those first manuscripts out in public and are willing to improve as they go with the feedback of beta readers. As authors gain experience and titles under their belt, they may continue to use beta readers but also employ formal, paid editing teams.

Going yet a step further, it has even been suggested by Stein (and others) that the future of reading might look like gaming. One example is the Black Crown project, a work of interactive fiction produced by Random House UK. The story begins with a series of questions; then the reader is put into a number of predicaments, as in a Choose-Your-Own-Adventure novel. There is an author behind it, Rob Sherman, who said in an interview: “It’s a scary thing because you need to relinquish control and allow for readers to have an experience different from the one you’re expecting. . . . I think pretty much all authors have to accept now that readers are going to take things and manipulate them and make them their own. Whether you give them permission to or not. And they’re going to share them with other people.”10

If this all seems too far-fetched, consider how Amazon collects untold data through its Kindle reading platform, and already records exactly how people read a particular book: how fast, how slowly, and the exact paragraph where a reader abandons the story. E-book subscription service Scribd does the same; JellyBooks now specializes in collecting reading data for publishers to use in their marketing plans prior to book launch. Such flexibility recalls the long-expected, but never realized, dream of forking stories—books that have multiple endings, or alternative storylines. Previous attempts at this sort of “hyperliterature” have met with dismal failure because readers seemed uninterested in deciding the plot; they wanted the author to decide. But in recent years complex stories with alternative pathways have been wildly successful in video games, and some of the techniques pioneered in taming the complexity of user-driven stories in games could migrate to books. One publishing startup, Lithomobilus, is already exploring this possibility.


These developments don’t mean the need for editors will diminish or that their gatekeeping role isn’t needed. To emphasize again, publishers must filter and amplify—with intention and meaning for a specific group. Furthermore, with the rise of self-publishing, the demand for editors has only increased, with authors increasingly aware of the need for some level of assistance in rewriting and polishing their work. There are now two freelance marketplaces focused on the publishing industry—Bibliocrunch and Reedsy—that help writers find qualified help, plus a range of boutique editorial-service companies that offer a package for every budget. Informal surveys always show that authors place top value on two people: their agent and their editor. Note that it’s not necessarily the publisher that the writer is valuing, but the relationship with a specific person who is nurturing her craft and career.

Industry futurist Richard Nash wrote in his 2012 essay “The Business of Literature” that the editor is a source of great value in the economics of literature and will remain valued for two primary reasons. First, because the world still needs editors—people who filter and amplify. But second, because editors have relationship skills. Publishers of the future, regardless of what form books take or where they’re sold, will always need to cultivate strong relationships with authors. Publishers can distinguish themselves with authors not necessarily by being the most technically advanced, or the most innovative in media creation and distribution, but by being trusted and respected partners. That partnership will start with the editor, as it has for generations.





CONCLUSION


AS TIME GOES BY: THE PAST AND FUTURE OF EDITING


Anyone who has followed the book publishing business in the twenty-first century has heard, probably ad nauseam, that the industry is undergoing disruption—a voguish word for “big, scary change.” The transformations in our time have been the more unsettling because in the past publishing changed so slowly. When I entered the industry in the 1980s, it wasn’t all that different from what it had been since the 1950s. Change was happening, to be sure, but predictable and gradual change. Big publishing grew more corporate and consolidated; chains and big-box stores gained market share, and independent bookstores declined; scholarly publishers struggled with shrinking library budgets. Even the arrival of Amazon in the 1990s did not—at first—fundamentally change the landscape. But a revolution driven largely by technology soon followed—beginning with the massive growth of internet bookselling as more Americans moved online, and most obviously marked by the arrival of the Kindle in 2007, plus the explosion of self-publishing arising from the first two phenomena. The publishing marketplace, and the business of serving it, has changed more drastically in the past fifteen years than in the half-century before.

The era of rapid change seems likely to continue, for the forces stressing the industry as I write have not reached equilibrium. Independent bookstores, battle tested by combat with both chains and Amazon, have held their own, and many are flourishing, but brick-and-mortar retail in general is still losing ground to online sales. While Amazon and e-books have soaked up the attention of industry alarmists, another serious issue for publishers has drawn less notice than it deserves. For all their progress in online marketing and social media, publishers still rely heavily on traditional publicity channels like newspapers and radio. Those media are struggling badly, further challenging publishers’ ability to make readers aware of new books.

Self-publishing continues to take market share from established houses, and while few best-selling authors have abandoned their publishers thus far, if blockbuster authors moved en masse in that direction it would truly change big publishing’s business model. The essays in this book may suggest why such a move has not yet happened: the array of services, and of expertise, that editors and publishers provide is by no means easy for a single author to replicate. Even if the author has the funds to hire those services, finding and coordinating them all is a big job. Doing that job is another way that publishers provide value. But we might yet see consultancies bundling such services for authors on a larger scale. Meanwhile, even at the non-best-selling level, the sheer quantity of self-published books competing with those from traditional houses has eroded the latter’s market share; we can’t yet predict how far that erosion will go.

Indeed, the book itself may be an unstable category. We are already seeing the creation of electronic works that include sound, video, hyperlinks, and other interactive elements with booklike content; some of this is taking the form of smartphone or tablet apps. So far, these multimedia experiments have had modest impact: it seems that book readers prefer the immersive and imaginative experience where the author’s words come to life in their own heads. But the ubiquity of other digital entertainment and communication, from Hollywood movies and music to group chat and Facebook live, available literally at consumers’ fingertips, inevitably has reduced the hours available for reading, creating further headwinds for publishing. If future generations raised on screens come to prefer interactive books, editors may need to master an entirely new set of skills, just as they once mastered typewriting, word processing, or tweeting.


How, in this environment, can one foresee the future of book editing? It’s hard at this moment to know whether the pace of change will slow down, as it has in the past, or just keep accelerating. And yet no matter how swiftly time goes by, on Publishers Row as in Casablanca, the fundamental things apply.

While working on this book, I happened to visit an exhibition in Venice celebrating the work of the city’s revered printer, and one of the first great editors and publishers, Aldo Manuzio, or Aldus Manutius as he styled himself. He was a humanist—a scholar of the classics—who in 1494 started a business to publish the work of Latin and Greek authors. As an editor, Aldus took pains to produce the best texts possible. As a publisher, he innovated, creating the first italic type and pioneering the octavo volume—easy to hold in one hand—as a format for literature. Beautifully designed and far easier to read than most earlier books had been, Aldus’s books helped establish reading as a leisure pastime, not just the province of scholars. They were also instrumental in the intellectual flowering of the Renaissance. Aldus’s “brand” became such a powerful symbol of quality that even today some publishers copy his anchor-and-dolphin colophon—just glance inside a Doubleday book.

Publishing has seen a half-millennium of change since Aldus, but his labors consisted quite recognizably of the same three editorial functions we have explored throughout this book:

• Acquisition. Here Aldus distinguished himself first by curation, selecting ancient works he believed readers would value. Later he would publish groundbreaking original works such as the mythological romance Hypnerotomachia Poliphilli.

• Text development. Aldus’s meticulous editing of classical works set his publications apart from others. He may have been the first to compare manuscript editions to establish the most accurate text. Though he was seldom working with new authors in real time, Aldus toiled to produce the best possible version of what each author created.

• Publication. Aldus showed genius in bringing his titles into the marketplace—creating new formats for books and realizing that elegant, readable design would expand the market of readers.



Looking at the paintings of Aldus’s Venice by contemporaries like Bellini or Carpaccio (or trying to make sense of the phantasmagoric Hypnerotomachia), we can see Aldus inhabited a vastly different world from our own. Yet there he was, just like the editors and publishers of today, connecting writers and readers. And in doing so, he provided something of value to each, making a lasting contribution to culture.

So while it may be impossible to predict where the publishing industry is going or what shape it will take a generation from now, the essence of what editors do, and the need for it, will endure. To take just one of the major trends mentioned above, the continued expansion of self-publishing inevitably creates an ever greater need for curation—call it an equal and opposite reaction. For readers overwhelmed by thousands of books to choose among, trusted tastemakers who can identify and acquire work worth spending one’s time on will surely be in demand. At the same time, the explosion of new titles means a growing need for editing in its most familiar sense—taking written content and making it better. Self-publishing authors who take their work seriously need such services, but so do the entity publishers, from institutions to church groups to restaurants, who want to produce quality publications. And authors of all kinds will still value professionals who can help connect them with their readers, identifying the likeliest audiences and using expertise to present their work in appealing ways. As we have seen, that too is the work of editors.

The career path for book editors in the future—perhaps for you who are reading this—may well be quite different from the one familiar to recent generations. Freelancing will be more common, and if large commercial publishers continue to consolidate, there will be fewer staff positions for editors in those houses. There is an equal and opposite reaction to this, too: the flowering of small independent publishers whose work is so well articulated in these pages by Erika Goldman and Jeff Shotts. Houses like Bellevue and Graywolf will attract authors by providing committed, attentive editing even if big corporations don’t. Editing has never been the best choice for those who seek a highly lucrative job; that is unlikely to change, and, as elsewhere in the creative professions, steady employment may be harder to come by in the twenty-first-century economy.

But for those with a passion for books, editing offers rewards that are hard to improve on—including a community of like-minded colleagues. One effect of the mediocre entry-level pay in publishing is that those who enter the business, almost to a one, do it because they love to read. Though it may sound simplistic to say, I have found that a peer group self-selected in this way is an incredibly congenial one.

I have resisted, both in writing and in editing this volume, soaring rhetoric about the creative genius of editors, their selfless labors, or their mystical bond with authors. Those things are real, to be sure, but writing and editing are serious business, even when they are joyful, and I feel sentimentalizing the work impedes actually understanding it. Nonetheless, I do believe that editing is a noble calling. Authors do the hardest, loneliest work, the work of facing the blank page and drawing something out of themselves to fill it. But editors do something difficult and demanding too: putting their sensibilities in service to another person (and putting their own egos aside) to help that person realize a creative vision and share it with an audience.

The core—the heart and soul—of editing will always be the editor–author relationship. That relationship begins before, and extends beyond, the act of making editorial suggestions. It starts with the editor reading a manuscript and feeling the spark—that urge to share what he’s just read with someone else. It continues with editor and author striving, sometimes happily and sometimes painfully, to turn that spark into a flame. And it reaches fruition when the flame becomes a fire, warming a widening circle of readers.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Editors are a busy lot. As these essays have probably made clear, to be a good editor usually means spending a long day at the office and then taking manuscripts home for nights and weekends; for freelancers, the workload is often similar except that home and office may be the same place. The writers of this volume wrested time out of their schedules, and probably away from friends and family, to set down their experiences and insights for the benefit of others. What they have done carries on publishing’s honorable tradition of mentorship. As you may imagine, it was with some trepidation that I undertook to edit the work of some of the best editors in the business. But every one of them responded to suggestions conscientiously and graciously, which made their editor’s job that much easier. So my first and most grateful acknowledgment is to my contributors. Thank you all.

In my own career, I have been fortunate to have several generous mentors. I owe to them much of what I have learned about editing and publishing, so I’d like to acknowledge them here: At Persea Books, Michael Braziller and Karen Braziller, who gave me my first job in the book business and from whom I learned firsthand how passion and commitment could drive an independent publishing house. At Crown Publishers, James O’Shea Wade, who, with Betty Prashker, gave me a chance as an acquiring editor, and who showed me the importance of maintaining both integrity and a sense of humor inside a conglomerate publishing house. At Oxford University Press, Laura Brown, a brilliant publisher whose vision enabled me to make the unlikely transition from a highly commercial house to a venerable scholarly one, and Ellen Chodosh, from whom I learned what humane and enlightened management is. Laura, Ellen, and some extraordinary colleagues at Oxford helped me discover how powerful genuine teamwork and esprit de corps can be in publishing. At Bloomsbury USA, Karen Rinaldi gave me the opportunity to launch an imprint, which was both an exhilarating challenge and a learning experience in even more ways than I anticipated.

I want to say a particular word of thanks to Thomas McCormack, who hired me as his assistant at St. Martin’s Press. More than anyone else I know in the business, Tom took the job of nurturing young talent seriously and went out of his way to educate not just his own assistants but other young staff members in the ways of publishing. As a result, SMP served as a training ground for a remarkable number of leading figures in the industry. Tom taught me an enormous amount, not only by dispensing advice but, more importantly, by giving me enough responsibility that I could learn things for myself. That is the best kind of mentorship.

When I accepted my first job, I asked my new boss if there was anything I should do to prepare for my first day of work. He said, “Get a copy of The Chicago Manual of Style and start reading it”—still excellent advice for anyone who wants to learn how books are put together. In a sense, then, the University of Chicago Press began my education in publishing, and I’m honored to share a list with the Chicago Manual itself. I’m grateful to my editor at the Press, Mary Laur, and her editorial director Christie Henry, who invited me to put together this book and have supported it during a prolonged gestation period. Mary has been smart, patient, good-humored, sensible, and responsive—all I could have asked for in my first experience on this end of the process. More than once we got almost dizzy contemplating the complexities of my editing editors writing about editing, and her editing my edits of the editors . . . but I think it has turned out all right with her guidance. Ruth Goring has copyedited with a gentle touch and scrupulous care. Thanks too to contributor Cal Morgan, who also gave me invaluable comments on my own chapters.

This book is dedicated to my parents. When I was a boy, my father was a screenwriter and filmmaker, and my first insights into what made stories work came from talking about movies we watched together when I must have been in middle school. Later he became a book editor, and his palpable love of his work helped make it seem like a career worth pursuing. Now in his nineties and still reading and writing, he remains an inspiration to me. I owe just as much to my mother, herself a writer and editor and the most voracious reader I ever knew. And at the risk of cliché, I must close by thanking my wife, Susan Hewitt, and our children, Henry and Kate Ginna—who have endured many years of manuscripts encroaching on what should have been time spent with them. Christopher Hitchens once said that a friend of his “identified bliss with writing or reading very hard in the afternoon, knowing that someone really, really nice was coming to dinner.” The only thing better is when the really nice people are in your house already.





GLOSSARY


account. An entity (bookstore, chain, wholesaler, or other business) that buys books in quantity from a publisher. In plural—“the accounts”—usually shorthand for a publisher’s bookseller customers.

acquiring editor. An editor tasked with acquiring new books for publication. Sometimes called an acquisitions editor, sponsoring editor, or commissioning editor.

acquisition. The act of putting a work under contract for publication, or acquiring it. The work so contracted is also called an acquisition. Acquisitions, plural, refers to the overall, ongoing editor’s task of acquiring new titles for the publisher.

advance, royalty. A sum of money paid by contractual agreement to the author in anticipation of royalty earnings. Royalty or rights income is credited against this advance and retained by the publisher until the advance is “earned out,” after which it flows to the author. Sometimes called a guarantee, as the author keeps the advance money even if not earned out.

advance copies. Copies of a printed book sent out to the author, agent, media, or other industry contacts before its official on-sale date. See also ARCs (advance reading copies).

agent, literary. A professional who represents an author’s work to publishers and negotiates on his or her behalf.

agile publishing. A publishing model, emulating that of certain technology companies, in which some of the editorial process is iterative and crowdsourced; the publisher incorporates reader feedback on a book into new versions published more quickly than traditional updated editions.

analytics. The practice of studying patterns in business data.

ARCs (advance reading copies). Copies of a book printed and bound for prepublication distribution to reviewers, media, booksellers, and other opinion makers. They may be lavishly produced with the commercial book cover design or printed more simply. In the past these copies were printed from early galley proofs, and they are still often called bound galleys. Another older term for these is BOMs, because a key destination for bound proofs was the Book-of-the-Month Club’s readers and judges.

art director. A person overseeing graphic and printing design in a publishing house, such as for book jackets and interior layouts. See also creative director.

art log. A record of a book’s art program: a document listing each illustration to be included with a book’s text, with information such as its size and placement. Supplied to the production editorial department as part of a manuscript’s transmittal.

auction. A formal procedure, typically conducted by a literary agent, for selling a book to one of multiple competing publishing houses. Auctions may be “best bid” style, in which each house makes a single offer, or involve repeated rounds of bidding. Rules may vary widely from one auction to another.

author information sheet (AI sheet). See title information sheet.

back ad. The promotional copy on the back panel of a printed book cover or dust jacket.

back matter. Material included following the main text of a book, such as acknowledgments, endnotes, glossary, index, etc. Also called end matter.

backlist. A publisher’s catalog of previously published titles. Generally refers to titles currently in print, excluding those in the frontlist.

beta reader. A reader recruited by an author to provide preliminary feedback and corrections on a work before it is exposed to the market.

bidding service. An online clearinghouse where freelance professionals such as editors or designers can offer their services to prospective clients.

Big Five. Industry shorthand for the five largest commercial publishing companies operating in the United States as of 2017: Penguin Random House, Hachette, HarperCollins, Macmillan, and Simon & Schuster.

binding. The covering holding the pages of a physical book together. See also hardcover and paperback.

BISAC codes. Standard subject descriptors agreed by the Book Industry Study Group, each one represented by an alphanumeric code—for example, LAN027000, Language Art & Disciplines/Publishing, the code for books like this one, or JUV059000, Juvenile Fiction/ Dystopian. BISAC stands for Book Industry Standards and Communications.

blurb. A favorable comment about a book supplied by a prominent author, celebrity, or expert. or a short excerpt from a book review. In older and especially British usage, may refer to any brief promotional copy, such as back ad or flap copy.

board book. A children’s book printed with cardboard pages to withstand rough handling (or teething). Typically aimed at the youngest group of readers.

book doctor. A freelance book editor. Doctoring usually connotes extensive developmental and line editing, sometimes including rewriting, possibly shading toward ghostwriting.

BookExpo. The major annual convention of the US trade publishing industry, where publishers promote forthcoming titles and their authors to booksellers, media, and consumers.

Bookscan. A service of the marketing consultancy AC Nielsen that tracks current sales of books in the UnitedStates. Bookscan captures primarily sales at retail, so it does not include some library, bulk and special sales. Its figures are estimated to include roughly 75–85 percent of total sales for trade books

bound galleys. See ARCs (advance reading copies).

break out. For a book, to sell above the expected level for its category or the author’s previous track record. It may be said of a title that it “broke out” or of a house that it “broke [a certain title] out.”

bricks-and-mortar stores. Retail stores in physical space, as opposed to e-tailers. These include independent booksellers and chains such as Barnes & Noble or Books-a-Million but also other stores that sell books, including Walmart and Costco.

buzz book. A book that attracts unusual prepublication attention. Certain titles are officially anointed as “Buzz Books” by being featured under that rubric at BookExpo or in industry publications such as Publishers Lunch and Publishers Weekly.

castoff. The projected length of a printed book based on the author’s manuscript and a proposed type design. To make such a projection is to “cast off” the manuscript.

catalog copy. The description of a given title prepared for a publisher’s catalog, typically also displayed on the publisher’s website and in various other online venues such as e-tailer listings.

chapter book. A relatively short book with brief chapters, usually fiction, aimed at newly independent readers (seven to ten years old).

clothbound. See hardcover.

college publishing. Textbook publishing specifically aimed at the university-level market.

college traveler. See sales rep.

commercial fiction. Popular fiction (as opposed to literary fiction) thought to be more concerned with entertaining readers than with literary ambition. Which novels are “literary” and which are “commercial” is in the eye of the beholder. Genre fiction is a subset of commercial fiction.

commission. In the United States, for an editor to originate a book by finding an author for a topic or story the editor has conceived. In British usage, commissioning editor is another term for acquiring editor, but this does not necessarily require commissioning in the American sense.

comp. In art department jargon, short for “comprehensive layout”: a designer’s presentation of a proposed design for a book’s interior layouts or cover.

comp titles. Books already published considered to be similar in audience to a given title under consideration. Comp is usually thought to be short for comparable, but may also mean competitive.

compositor. See typesetter.

con. Short for convention, a gathering of fans, as in Comic Con or Worldcon (World Science Fiction Convention); often important venues for genre fiction authors and editors.

copy. In publishing-specific usage, any text that is to be (or has been) set into type, including a book manuscript, back ad, or promotional description. Hence copyediting, catalog copy, cover copy, etc.

copyediting. Usually the final editorial stage of preparing a manuscript for publication—a meticulous read for technical errors, style, and internal consistency, along with marking or electronically coding the text to be ready for typesetting.

course adoption. The selection of a textbook (or other title) for use in school or university classes.

cover. In strict usage, the exterior of a printed book, as distinct from a dust jacket. But often used more loosely for the latter as well, as in speaking of a cover design, cover copy, or “cover reveal.”

cover reveal. The promotion of a book by revealing its jacket or cover design before publication, often on a popular blog or magazine website.

creative director. The person in a publishing company responsible for visual design (including book covers and interiors as well as web pages, advertising, and company branding in general). A similar role to art director, though “creative director” connotes wider responsibilities, and in large organizations several art directors may report to a creative director.

crossover book. A work aimed initially at a scholarly or specialized readership that also appeals to a general audience. Some books are intentionally written as crossovers; others break out of their specialized category based on readers’ responses.

delivery date. (1) The date agreed in a publishing contract by which the author must deliver a “complete and satisfactory” manuscript and any other items, such as images or permissions to reprint material, necessary for publication. (2) In some houses, the date on which finished books are scheduled to arrive in a publisher’s warehouse, as opposed to the publication date, when the book is officially available for sale at retail establishments. Also called bound book date, in-warehouse date, or in-stock date.

developmental editing. Editorial intervention, usually at an early stage, to help the author with structure, substance, or other fundamental elements of a manuscript. Compare with copyediting and line editing.

developmental review. In textbook publishing, peer review of a manuscript or proposal aimed at enhancing its fitness for a target course market.

digital publishing. See electronic publishing.

distribution. The process of making books available to consumers and filling orders for them. In publishing, the word is most frequently applied to books moving through the physical supply chain but can also refer to electronic distribution of e-books.

dust jacket. The printed wrapper around most hardcover books and some paperbacks. Sometimes called simply a jacket.

earn out. See advance, royalty.

e-book. A book published in electronic form. Most e-books from established houses are published alongside printed editions, but many titles are released as “e-book originals” or “e-only” with no printed counterpart, especially in the self-publishing market.

edition. (1) A version of a book that has been created for the first time, as in “first edition,” or one resulting from revisions to the previous version (updating of content, new forewords or afterwords, and the like), as in “second edition” or “revised edition.” Sometimes a synonym for printing (or impression), as in “an edition of 1000 copies,” but in contemporary book publishing, edition implies a version with significant changes to what existed before. See also printing. (2) One format out of several of the same text (e.g., “audio edition,” “movie tie-in edition”).

editor. A publishing professional whose responsibilities may include any or all of the following: book acquisitions; managing relationships with authors and literary agents; manuscript development and revision; copyediting; seeing works through the production process; involvement in their publicity and marketing, including writing title information sheets and promotional copy; and overall project management.

As a job title, “editor” varies with the specific responsibilities and the type of publishing house (as described throughout this volume), as well as the experience and managerial status of the individual editor. Above the level of editorial assistant, titles that reflect increasing seniority, responsibility (including signing goals), and autonomy generally include assistant editor, associate editor, editor, senior editor, and executive editor. At the top of the editorial hierarchy sits an editorial director or editor in chief. The latter is almost by definition a single person, but in some houses more than one editorial director may oversee individual imprints or specific lists (e.g., editorial director for fiction). Editors who are responsible for a manuscript from transmittal through prepublication stages to manufacturing commonly have the title production editor, project editor, or manuscript editor. They are usually members of a department separate from the one whose editors acquire and develop manuscripts, and the head of this department is commonly titled managing editor. Copyeditors have specialized expertise in copyediting and today are usually freelancers.

editorial assistant. A staff member, usually entry level, who works for one or more editors, performing clerical and editorial tasks (which may often be the same thing) in what often serves as an apprenticeship. See also editor.

editorial board (ed board). The group within a publishing house that approves proposed acquisitions, sometimes called a publishing board (pub board) or acquisition board; also, metonymically, a meeting of this group, as in “I’m bringing the proposal up at ed/pub board tomorrow.” Some houses, especially smaller ones, may not have a formal board. University presses often have a board consisting of faculty members in addition to or instead of an internal one.

editorial director. See editor.

editorial letter. A document sent from editor to author with specific recommendations for revising the author’s manuscript. It may accompany a detailed line edit of the manuscript or may stand by itself. Sometimes called an editorial memo.

editorial meeting. A meeting of a publishing house’s editorial staff, sometimes joined by colleagues from marketing, sales, or other departments, to discuss proposed acquisitions, book ideas, and other business issues. Typically held weekly but may occur more often, or less. In some houses the editorial meeting and pub board meeting are the same thing; in others they are distinct.

editor in chief. See editor.

electronic publishing. Publishing works distributed in some electronic form, whether via an internet browser, e-book reader, or older technology such as CD or DVD. Publishers have long used electronic tools, from computer typesetting to optical scanning, to produce printed books, but electronic publishing implies the book itself is being delivered to readers by digital means. Used more or less interchangeably with digital publishing.

el–hi publishing. Textbook publishing specifically aimed at the elementary through high school, or “K–12,” market.

end matter. See back matter.

enhanced e-book. An e-book that includes not just the text of a printed edition but additional features such as sound, video, or interactive elements.

entity publisher. An organization, such as a business or not-for-profit group, that publishes its own content (such as reports, guidebooks, cookbooks, or catalogs) for sale or gratis distribution.

ePub. A widely used format for electronic book files.

e-tailers. Online retailers. Amazon is the largest, but many other companies sell books online, including some that originated as bricks-and-mortar stores.

fact-checking. The practice of confirming the accuracy of factual statements in a work before publication. For a variety of reasons, unlike newspaper or magazine publishers, book publishers do not routinely check facts, though some individual titles may be fact-checked.

fair use. In copyright law, the doctrine that allows an author to quote or reproduce the work of another creator, in certain ways and for certain purposes, without compensating that creator.

fan fiction. Stories written by fans of an existing fictional work or series, using characters and settings from the model.

file cleanup. The process in which a copyeditor or production editor removes tracked changes, author or editor comments, and other extraneous material from a manuscript before sending it to typesetting.

first pass pages. The first set of typeset page proofs delivered by a compositor to the publisher, for proofreading and review by the author. Also known as first pages or first pass proofs. After house and author send any corrections to the compositor, the latter produces second pass pages or revised pages (and if necessary, further passes until all errors are corrected).

flap copy. The descriptive and promotional copy that appears on the flaps of a book’s dust jacket. Also called jacket copy.

font. A set of type of a particular typeface and size. Widely used erroneously to refer simply to a typeface in any size.

Frankfurt Book Fair. The world’s longest-established and largest annual gathering of publishers, booksellers, and others (dating back to the fifteenth century); the major international fair for book sales and rights deals.

freelancer. An individual hired on a contract basis to perform services for a company or an author. Freelance editors often specialize in one type of editing or one type of book and offer their services to multiple publishing houses.

front matter. The pages of a book before the beginning of the main text, including such items as title and copyright pages, contents page, and preface. Also called preliminary matter or prelims.

frontlist. A publisher’s catalog of current titles, usually defined as those published within the past one or two years.

full bleed. Material printed across the entire surface of a book page or cover so that the design “bleeds” off the edge.

galleys. Historically, the first set of typeset proofs from a compositor, delivered on long single-column sheets. Until computerized typesetting arrived, type was not laid out in page format, with art or other design elements included, until after proofreading and correction. The term derives from the French galée, a long tray for holding type. Because galleys were for generations the first set of proofs received, the term galleys is still widely though inaccurately applied to any first pass pages.

genre fiction. Novels and short stories generally intended for a popular audience, plot driven, and fitting into a well-established category such as mystery, romance, science fiction, or fantasy. See also commercial fiction.

ghostwriting. Writing a book under the name of another person. Originally the term meant without credit (hence “ghost”), though today “ghostwriters” may be identified on a title page by “as told to” or “with.”

guarantee. See advance, royalty.

handle, sales. A one- or two-line distillation of a book’s key selling points. On title information sheets, frequently called a keynote.

hand-selling. The act of marketing a book to a customer with a personal sales pitch, as practiced most commonly in independent (indie) bookstores. See also word of mouth.

hardcover. A printed book with a hard exterior binding, usually of cardboard wrapped in another material. In the past the material was often fabric, so older publishing personnel still speak of “clothbound” books; today a sturdy paper is more common, but cloth is still in use.

house, publishing. Term often used interchangeably for publishing company, probably reflecting the traditionalism of an industry where many businesses began as dynastic family firms.

imprint. A publishing “brand” within a larger company identity, usually denoting a particular editorial vision or focus. Sometimes named for a presiding editor (“A Margaret K. McElderry Book”) and nested under an existing house name; sometimes a market-oriented niche list (Harper Wave, Vintage Contemporaries).

in print. Currently listed as available for sale from a publisher. Before e-books, keeping a title “in print” meant a publisher had to maintain an inventory of physical books; when these sold out the publisher had to invest in reprinting or let the title go “out of print.” Today publishers often deem titles to be in print even if they only exist in e-book or print-on-demand form, though agents and authors may disapprove of this.

in stock. Available for sale in physical, printed form from a publisher’s or wholesaler’s warehouse. Applies by definition only to conventionally printed books; e-books or print-on-demand books are effectively always “in stock.”

independent (indie) bookstores. Bookstores not owned by large corporations. A relatively small sector of the overall book market, but one of outsize importance because of its diversity and the strong connection of local booksellers with their communities.

independent (indie) publishers. Publishers not owned by large corporations; some are constituted as nonprofit organizations. Some authors who self-publish consider themselves indie publishers, though this use of the term is considered inappropriate or confusing by others in the industry on the grounds that selecting authors is a key part of the publisher’s role.

indexing. The process of creating an index, an alphabetically arranged list of people, places, and concepts discussed in a book. Indexes are generally prepared by authors or freelancers based on first pass pages.

inserts. Sections of a printed book where illustrations are grouped, bound between pages of the verbal text; typically printed on different stock for better reproduction. Also called a gallery.

ISBN (International Standard Book Number). A unique number assigned to each edition and format (though not each printing) of a published book, almost universally used by major publishers. (Amazon, however, uses only its own identifier system for many e-books.)

jacket. See dust jacket.

jacket copy. See flap copy.

jobbers. See wholesalers.

juvenile publishing. A somewhat old-fashioned term for children’s book publishing, still used in some settings (for instance, in BISAC codes and some library listings).

keynote. The main selling point or sales handle for a book, typically identified by this term on a title information sheet.

keywords. See metadata.

launch meeting. A meeting in which editors present one or more upcoming titles to their colleagues to “launch” them toward publication. The timing of the meeting, and its focus and participants, may vary: in most trade houses, this is the first meeting at which editors present a future season’s titles to colleagues in marketing and other departments, while in some houses it’s focused more on the production editing and manufacturing process.

legal vetting. The reading of a manuscript by the publisher’s counsel for the purpose of flagging potential problems such as libel, copyright infringement, or invasion of privacy. Also called a legal read or legal review.

license. To convey by contract the authority to publish or adapt the content of a book, as in “the publisher licensed the paperback rights.” Also used as a noun, as in “the paperback license had a term of eight years.”

line editing. Detailed editing of a manuscript—line by line, as the term suggests—but not necessarily correcting all fine points of grammar, punctuation, or style, which is the task of copyediting.

list. A publisher’s complete catalog of titles, the output of the publishing house. Publishers also speak of seasonal lists (“the fall list”), or other specialized subsets of the overall list (“our cookbook list”), and an editor may speak of her acquisitions as her list. See also backlist and frontlist.

list price. The publisher’s official price for a book before any discounts offered by retailers or wholesalers. Often used in calculating the author’s royalties.

literary agent. See agent, literary.

literary fiction. Fiction considered to be more concerned with literary values than with entertainment. Compare to commercial fiction.

managing editor. See editor.

manuscript. As noted in the introduction, an anachronistic term still universal in American publishing for the document (physical or electronic) containing a book’s text; the raw material that editors edit. See also typescript.

margin. Profit margin. As in other industries, gross margin refers to revenue after direct costs of goods sold—such as royalties, printing, and distribution—while net margin takes into account indirect costs such as overhead.

mass-market paperback. A paperback book, generally in rack-size format, designed to be widely sold in outlets such as supermarkets, drugstores, and newsstands.

metadata. Data about data—typically, information linked to a book’s listing in the electronic database of a publisher, retailer, or other entity. A book’s metadata include author, title, format, and price but also keywords related to its content to aid in online searching.

midlist book. A title whose sales expectations, or sales history, are below best-selling levels but high enough to be considered a viable publication. The “midlist” may be thought of as the middle of an imaginary bell curve of sales across a publisher’s list.

monograph. A book-length academic work on a specialized subject.

option clause. A standard contract clause giving the publisher, within certain conditions, an option, or right of first refusal, on the next work written by the author.

out of print. See in print.

P&L. Short for “profit and loss.” In editorial parlance, a worksheet showing the projected financial investment and return for a given title (or, retrospectively, its actual results). Publishing houses or their divisions also have P&L statements for their overall performance, but among editors “P&L” almost always refers to the former.

P.P.B. Paper, printing, and binding costs. “P.P.B.” serves as shorthand for the bundled costs of producing copies of a printed book. Sometimes called stock costs. Compare to plant costs.

packager, book. A person or firm that originates books for publishers and that supplies, as well as the content, some of the work normally done within the publishing house, such as editing, design, or even printing—in effect outsourcing those tasks in advance. Titles involving complicated illustration and design or multiple authors are often packaged. Also called a book producer.

paperback. A book with a stiff paper or thin card cover, as opposed to a hardcover. Also called softcover. See also mass-market paperback and trade paperback.

paranormal romance. A popular genre combining elements of romance fiction with elements of horror, science fiction, or fantasy. Twilight was a breakout success in this genre.

peer review. The practice in academic publishing of obtaining assessments of a proposed acquisition from expert readers in the author’s discipline (her peers). Often called simply review.

permission. Formal clearance from a rights holder, such as a publisher or a photographic archive, to reproduce copyrighted material.

plant costs. Costs incurred one time only in producing a book, such as a jacket designer’s fee or typesetting costs, as opposed to manufacturing costs incurred each time a book is reprinted. Sometimes called plate costs. Compare to P.P.B.

platform. An author’s capacity to command the attention of readers, based on her reputation, expertise, celebrity, social media following, etc.

preemptive offer (preempt). An editor’s bid made to a literary agent before an auction for rights to a work, attempting to “take it off the table”—acquire the book before formal bidding starts.

prelims. See front matter.

press. In publishing usage, either (1) a publishing organization (as in university press) or (2) a printing press used to produce books, as in “press date,” the date at which a book is due to be printed.

printing. A quantity of books printed by a publisher at one time, as in “a first printing of 25,000 copies.” Also called an impression. Publishers may make changes to a text between one printing and another (such as correcting errors), but if it is changed significantly the revised text is called a new edition.

print-on-demand (POD). The practice, enabled by digital technology, by which book copies are not printed until a publisher or retailer receives orders for them—typically one copy, or a small quantity, at a time.

producer, book. See packager, book.

production. Broadly, the part of the publishing process involved in making the edited manuscript into a printed or digital book. Encompasses both production editorial (copyediting, design, typesetting, and proofreading) and manufacturing (the printing and binding of physical copies).

production editor. See editor.

professional publishing. The sector of publishing aimed at readers who seek information for their professional specialties, such as legal publishing or STM publishing. Often includes journals, newsletters, and databases as well as books.

proofreading. Checking typeset or printed material against the author’s manuscript for errors. Compare to slugging.

proofs. Printed copies made from typeset electronic files, plates, negatives, or positives used to examine and correct a work’s text or visual elements before final printing. See also first pass pages.

proposal. A summary and prospectus, sometimes with sample text, of an unwritten or uncompleted book offered by an author to a publisher for a contract.

publication date (pub date). The date when a book is officially available for sale at retail establishments, usually several weeks after the bound books are delivered to the publisher’s warehouse, allowing time for copies to be distributed in the marketplace.

publisher. As a job title, the head of a publishing house or imprint, the person ultimately responsible for both editorial and business decisions.

publishing board (pub board). See editorial board (ed board).

query. A message from an author or agent to an editor describing, and inviting the latter’s interest in, a book project. If such interest is expressed, the author/agent will submit a proposal or manuscript.

rack size. The standard format for mass-market paperbacks, designed to fit in the wire racks common in newsstands, supermarkets, and other such locations.

reader’s report. A written assessment of the strengths and weaknesses—normally from both editorial and commercial perspectives—of a possible acquisition. May be prepared by editorial staff members (commonly assistants), but in special cases (e.g., translations) and in scholarly peer review may come from outside readers.

reference publishing. A category of publishing focused on books and, increasingly, digital products, often multiauthored, that have a practical purpose—dictionaries, encyclopedias, atlases, guidebooks, and the like, including works like this one. Most trade and scholarly publishers have some reference works on their lists; a few publish such titles exclusively.

retailers. Businesses that sell books directly to consumers, whether online, by mail, or in physical stores (as opposed to wholesalers, another kind of account). In addition to traditional booksellers, merchants such as Walmart and Target and many specialty accounts—gourmet shops, craft stores, etc.—hold a significant share of the retail book market.

returns. Unsold copies of a books returned by accounts to the publisher. Most returns from retailers or wholesalers receive full credit from the publisher.

rights. The contractual authorization to publish, adapt, or distribute a work in a certain format, language, or territory (as in “movie rights,” “German rights,” or “Canadian rights”). See also subsidiary rights and volume rights.

royalty. A contractually agreed sum paid to an author for each copy of a work sold, or as a percentage of income from other rights sold. List royalties are computed on the list price of a book, in which case they do not vary with the publisher’s discount to customers; net royalties are a percentage of the amount received by the publisher for each sale, called net receipts. See also advance, royalty.

royalty statement. A publisher’s accounting, delivered to an author at contractually agreed intervals, of book sales and rights income.

running heads. Copy set at the top of printed pages, usually containing information such as the author’s name or the book or chapter title; when set at the bottom of pages, called running feet.

sales meeting. Generally, a meeting at which editors present forthcoming titles to sales reps and marketing staffs. A sales conference is a large formal meeting at which an entire season’s list and marketing plan is presented.

sales rep. A sales representative, generally one who calls on booksellers or other accounts. A sales rep who visits higher-education faculty members to sell books for courses is a college traveler.

scholarly publishing. The sector of book publishing dedicated primarily to publishing works by scholars for other scholars and their students (and the libraries that serve them). Also called academic publishing. Includes both university presses and some commercial firms that publish for this market.

season. A specified period of time during which a publisher releases a batch of new titles. Traditionally book publishers divided a year into two seasons, fall and spring, though book seasons begin before and end after their meteorological counterparts; large houses may have three four-month seasons in a year.

self-publishing. Distributing and marketing a book one has written at one’s own expense, rather than through an existing publishing house. In the past, authors sometimes paid vanity presses to release their work, but many services now exist allowing authors to control the process themselves. Compare to independent (indie) publishing.

setting copy. The unique copy, paper or electronic, of a manuscript, prepared by the copyeditor and designer for typesetting, with all edits and design specifications indicated.

signature. A segment of a printed book formed from one printed sheet of paper folded into multiple pages. Commonly thirty-two pages, but may be fewer.

signing. Synonym for acquisition. To “sign” a book is to acquire it, though editors also speak of “signing” an author, meaning to acquire his work.

signing goals. Specific numerical targets, usually measured by projected sales in dollars, for an editor’s annual level of acquisitions.

slugging. Checking a stage of typeset proofs against an earlier stage, such as second against first pass pages—as distinct from proofreading, when proof is checked against manuscript.

slush pile. The supply of unsolicited submissions directed to a publishing house but no specific editor—originally a physical “pile,” now including both paper and emailed material.

small press. A small publishing house; the term usually connotes one with a literary bent. (What is small, like what is literary, is open to discussion.) Small presses are independent (indie) publishers by definition, but not all independent publishers are small.

special sales. Sales outside of regular book-retailing channels, such as through specialty stores, mail order, corporate accounts, or charitable organizations. Special sales have different sales terms, and royalty rates, from regular sales.

specs. Shorthand for specifications for typesetting, design, or printing—determinants of the physical or visual presentation of a title.

sponsoring editor. See acquiring editor.

STM publishing. Abbreviation for scientific, technical, and medical publishing; a large and profitable market sector aimed at specialists in those fields. STM publishing includes books but is dominated by journals and online products.

style. In publishing-specific usage (as distinct, say, from “literary style”), an agreed, consistent standard for usage, punctuation, spelling, references, and other elements of the content presented in a book. Part of copyediting is ensuring that a work consistently follows the same style throughout. Publishers typically use a given style guide, such as The Chicago Manual of Style, as a reference point.

style sheet. A document made up by a copyeditor recording the style adopted for a given book—later used by typesetter and proofreader as a reference.

subheadings (subheads). Titles for sections within a book chapter, set off typographically from body copy. Some chapters have subsections within sections, creating a hierarchy of subheads: A heads, B heads, etc.

submit. To present a book, in proposal or manuscript form, to an editor for possible publication. The material presented is a submission. See also unsolicited submission.

subsidiary rights (sub rights). Rights licensed by the publisher and author to a third party to adapt or publish other versions of a book. These may include paperback or audio rights, dramatic rights, book club, translation rights, or even video game rights. Revenue from the sales of such rights is split between publisher and author at contractually agreed percentages (sub rights splits).

supply chain. The system of people, companies, and processes involved in creating a book and delivering it, in print or digitally, to a consumer—that is, a reader. In book publishing, “supply chain” refers principally to the production and distribution process—printing, warehousing, sales, shipping, and retailing—though technically it includes writing, editing, and design as well.

territory. A defined geographical area within which contracted publishing rights apply, such as “North American rights” or “UK and Commonwealth rights.”

textbook publishing. The sector of book publishing devoted to producing works specifically for use in courses. Generally divided into el–hi publishing, for elementary through high school students, and college publishing.

tipsheet. See title information sheet (TI sheet).

title. In publishing-specific usage, a book considered as a work for publication, in any or all of its varied formats. As in “we published large-print and audio editions of that title as well as hardcover and paperback.”

title information sheet (TI sheet). A document containing a description, specs, sales keynote and other selling points, and author information for a given title. A key tool in sales, marketing, and publicity. Also called author information sheet (AI sheet), tipsheet, or sellsheet.

TOC. Abbreviation for table of contents.

track record. An author’s title-by-title sales history; an important factor in assessing the sales prospects for a new title by that author.

trade paperback. A paperback book, generally in a format similar to a hardcover edition except for the binding, intended to be sold in bookstores and other book retail, as opposed to mass-market, channels. Sometimes called a quality paperback.

trade publishing. The sector of book publishing devoted to general consumer titles—books of the kind sold in regular bookstores, or what was historically called “the book trade.” Though such books are now sold in many nonbookstore outlets and online, the term trade endures to distinguish this market sector from textbook and other kinds of publishing.

transmittal. The formal handoff of an edited manuscript, agreed by author and editor to be ready for publication, to production. The transmittal manuscript is the unique printout or electronic file that must pass through the production editorial process, with annotations from the copyeditor and book designer.

transom, over the. A phrase indicating an unsolicited submission. It dates from the days when offices had transom windows above their doors, and desperate authors were imagined throwing their manuscripts through them: one way of getting past the gatekeeper. If not sent to an individual editor, an over-the-transom submission lands in the slush pile.

trim size. The outer dimensions of a printed and bound book page. Given in inches in the United States, millimeters almost everywhere else. Standard hardcover and paperback formats in the United States are commonly referred to by trim size, e.g., “6×9.”

typeface. A set of text characters that share a consistent and distinctive design. A typeface may include roman, italic, boldface, condensed, and other fonts. Typefaces are designated by name, such as Baskerville, Times Roman, or Helvetica.

typescript. The term commonly (and inaccurately, for the most part) used in British publishing for what American publishers call (equally inaccurately) a manuscript.

typesetter. A person or company that prepares books for printing or digital publication from an author’s manuscript. Almost all typesetters now use computers, but originally pieces of wooden or metal type were set or “composed” by hand to create pages; hence the synonym for this term: compositor.

unit cost. The cost of creating a single printed or digital copy of a book. An estimated unit cost is an important component of a book’s preacquisition P&L. Unit cost is also an important factor in considering how many copies of a book to print or reprint.

university press. A publishing house connected to, and usually sponsored by, a college or university. Typically university presses specialize in academic monographs, but they may also publish textbooks, trade books, and reference books.

unsolicited submission. A work submitted to an editor for publication directly by an author, unrequested by the editor, and without benefit of an agent.

urban fantasy. A subgenre of fantasy books in which speculative elements are combined with recognizable real-world settings.

vanity press. A house that charges fees to authors, rather than paying them, to publish their books. Publishing through a vanity press is effectively a form of self-publishing; before the advent of e-books and print on demand, it was one of the few methods available to authors who had not found a traditional publisher or preferred not to try.

verticalization. The practice of focusing a publisher’s list or an imprint around a certain community of readers, genre, or subject (such as romance fiction or sustainable living), called a vertical.

vetting. See legal vetting.

viral marketing. Publicizing a book by means of social media. It may mean spreading word-of-mouth book recommendations or, less directly, creating internet-friendly content related to the book that will be widely shared, raising awareness of the title.

volume rights. A common term loosely denoting the main publication rights to a title, usually the right to publish in hardcover, paperback, and e-book form, as distinct from subsidiary rights.

wholesalers. Businesses that serve as intermediaries between publishers and retailers by buying large volumes of books at a high discount and supplying them to booksellers at a lower one. Wholesalers serve the market by providing convenience, speed, and customer service in fulfilling demand, versus ordering directly from publishers. Some wholesalers also serve libraries or other specialty customers. Also called jobbers.

word of mouth. Personal recommendation of a book by one reader to another by oral or written means. Long considered the best, as well as most cost effective, method of generating sales and consequently the Holy Grail of publishers’ marketing efforts. Word of mouth practiced by retail booksellers is, perhaps confusingly, hand-selling; see also viral marketing.

young adult (YA) book. A title intended for older children and adolescents, usually defined as ages twelve to eighteen. As with all children’s literature, there are fluid and sometimes contested boundaries between age categories. Many titles published as YA have have been popular with adults, such as the Harry Potter and Hunger Games series.





FURTHER RESOURCES


What follows is not an exhaustive list but a selection of books, other publications, and online resources that may be useful to a reader who wants to learn more about subjects discussed in this book. I have included my own comments about some items that I think are particularly valuable or noteworthy. Some of the online resources require subscriptions or have separate free and paid versions.—P.G.





BOOKS


REFERENCE BOOKS, HANDBOOKS, AND PRACTICAL WORKS ON THE CRAFT OF EDITING


Adin, Richard. The Business of Editing: Effective and Efficient Ways to Think, Work, and Prosper. N.p.: Waking Lion, 2014. Practical advice specifically for freelance editors.

Bell, Susan. The Artful Edit: On the Practice of Editing Yourself. New York: W. W. Norton, 2007.

Bielstein, Susan M. Permissions, A Survival Guide: Blunt Talk about Art as Intellectual Property. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.

The Chicago Manual of Style. 17th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017. Not just indispensable as a style reference but full of useful information about the publishing process.

Davies, Gill. Book Commissioning and Acquisition. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2004.

Dunham, Steve. The Editor’s Companion: An Indispensable Guide to Editing Books, Magazines, Online Publications, and More. Cincinnati: Writer’s Digest Books, 2014.

Eckstut, Arielle, and David Henry Sterry. The Essential Guide to Getting Your Book Published: How to Write It, Sell It, and Market It . . . Successfully! New York: Workman, 2010. Much useful information both on finding a traditional publisher and on self-publishing.

Einsohn, Amy. The Copyeditor’s Handbook: A Guide for Book Publishing and Corporate Communications; With Exercises and Answer Keys. 3rd ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.

Ennis, Stacy. The Editor’s Eye: A Practical Guide to Transforming Your Book from Good to Great. San Francisco: Night Owls, 2013.

Germano, William. Getting It Published: A Guide for Scholars and Anyone Else Serious about Serious Books. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016. Smart, knowledgeable, and written with verve.

Gross, Gerald, ed. Editors on Editing: What Writers Need to Know about What Editors Do. 3rd ed. New York: Grove, 1993. Though dated in some respects, a highly informative collection of essays by accomplished editors, mostly of trade books.

Guthrie, R. Publishing: Principles and Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2011.

Lee, Marshall. Bookmaking: Editing, Design, Production. 3rd ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 2004. A venerable (if not fully up-to-date) resource, weighted toward design and production but offering a thorough overview of publishing.

Lerner, Betsy. The Forest for the Trees: An Editor’s Advice to Writers. Rev. ed. New York: Riverhead Books, 2010. Addressed to writers, but includes much astute commentary on the editor’s side of the publishing process.

Luey, Beth. Handbook for Academic Authors. 5th ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010.

McCormack, Thomas. The Fiction Editor, the Novel, and the Novelist. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2006. Idiosyncratic, pungently expressed, and shrewdly pragmatic observations by a veteran editor.

Norton, Scott. Developmental Editing: A Handbook for Freelancers, Authors, and Publishers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009. Wry, sensible, and well-organized; excellent advice for any editor involved with manuscripts at a level deeper than copyediting.

Poynter, Dan. The Self-Publishing Manual: How to Write, Print and Sell Your Own Book. Santa Barbara, CA: Para, 2007.

Rabiner, Susan, and Alfred Fortunato. Thinking like Your Editor: How to Write Great Serious Nonfiction—and Get It Published. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002. One of the most insightful books available on nonfiction writing and editing.

Saller, Carol Fisher. The Subversive Copy Editor: Advice from Chicago (or, How to Negotiate Good Relationships with Your Writers, Your Colleagues, and Yourself). 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016. Not a book of editorial rules but possibly even more useful: guidance from a veteran copyeditor on how to apply the rules and when to bend them.

Sharpe, Leslie T, and Irene Gunther. Editing Fact and Fiction: A Concise Guide to Book Editing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Skillin, Marjorie E., and Robert M. Gay. Words into Type. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974. Overdue for revision but still beloved for its coverage of grammar and punctuation.

Siegfied, Carin. The Insider’s Guide to a Career in Book Publishing. Charlotte, NC: Chickadee Books, 2014.

Woll, Thomas. Publishing for Profit: Successful Bottom-Line Management for Book Publishers. Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 2010.





BIOGRAPHIES, MEMOIRS, AND GENERAL WORKS ON THE PUBLISHING BUSINESS


Athill, Diana. Stet: A Memoir. New York: Grove, 2000.

Berg, A. Scott. Max Perkins: Editor of Genius. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1978. A first-rate biography of the editor who has (partly thanks to this book) become the icon of literary editing.

Bhaskar, Michael. The Content Machine: Towards a Theory of Publishing from the Printing Press to the Digital Network. London: Anthem, 2013.

Cerf, Bennett. At Random: The Reminiscences of Bennett Cerf. New York: Random House, 1977. Based on an oral history, the memoir of the founder of Random House.

Clark, Giles N, and Angus Phillips. Inside Book Publishing. 5th ed. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2014.

Cowley, Malcolm. The Long Voyage: Selected Letters of Malcolm Cowley, 1915–1987. Edited by Hans Bak. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2014. Cowley, like Max Perkins, was one of the great editors of the twentieth century.

Dardis, Tom. Firebrand: The Life of Horace Liveright. New York: Random House, 1995.

Epstein, Jason. Book Business: Publishing Past, Present, and Future. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002. An innovative publisher’s look at the twentieth-century book business and his own career.

Giroux, Robert. The Education of an Editor. New York: R. R. Bowker, 1982.

Gottlieb, Robert. Avid Reader: A Life. New York: Farrar Straus & Giroux, 2016. A memoir of a brilliant editorial career at Simon & Schuster, Knopf, and the New Yorker.

Greenberg, Susan. Editors Talk about Editing: Insights for Readers, Writers and Publishers. New York: Peter Lang, 2015.

Kachka, Boris. Hothouse: The Art of Survival and the Survival of Art at America’s Most Celebrated Publishing House, Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013.

Korda, Michael. Another Life: A Memoir of Other People. New York: Random House, 1999. Possibly the most entertaining memoir of an editor to be found in print.

Kurowski, Travis, Wayne Miller, and Kevin Prufer, eds. Literary Publishing in the Twenty-First Century. Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions, 2016. Essays from a variety of editors, publishers, authors, and critics.

MacNiven, Ian S. “Literchoor Is My Beat”: A Life of James Laughlin, Publisher of New Directions. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2014. A biography of one of the best independent literary publishers in America, the founder of New Directions.

Perkins, Maxwell E., and John H. Wheelock. Editor to Author: The Letters of Maxwell E. Perkins. New York: Scribner, 1950. Perkins’s letters are models not just of editorial insight but of tact in expressing it.

Schiffrin, André. The Business of Books: How International Conglomerates Took Over Publishing and Changed the Way We Read. London: Verso, 2000.

Silverman, Al. The Time of Their Lives: The Golden Age of Great American Book Publishers, Their Editors, and Authors. New York: Truman Talley Books, 2008.

Tebbel, John. Between Covers: The Rise and Transformation of Book Publishing in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. A solid overview from the beginning of American publishing through the 1980s; drawn from Tebbel’s four-volume history.

Thompson, John B. Merchants of Culture: The Publishing Business in the Twenty-First Century. 2nd ed. New York: Plume, 2012. An inquisitive scholar’s study of the current trade book business. An excellent place to begin in seeking to understand the industry.





MAGAZINES AND JOURNALS


Bookforum (www.bookforum.com).

The Bookseller (www.thebookseller.com). Trade magazine of the British publishing industry but with international coverage.

Journal of Electronic Publishing (www.journalofelectronicpublishing.org).

Journal of Scholarly Publishing (www.utpjournals.press/loi/jsp).

Poets & Writers (www.pw.org). Principally for writers but has some coverage of publishing, including a regular feature of interviews with working editors.

Publishers Weekly (www.publishersweekly.com). The trade magazine of American book publishing; its website includes one of the major jobs boards in the industry.





BLOGS AND NEWS SITES


An American Editor (americaneditor.wordpress.com). The blog of Rich Adin, an experienced freelance editor (see his book listed above).

Book Riot (www.bookriot.com).

CMOS Shop Talk (cmosshoptalk.com). A blog from the editors of the Chicago Manual of Style.

Doctor Syntax (www.doctorsyntax.net). A blog on books and publishing by the editor of this volume.

Futurebook (www.futurebook.net).

Guardian book page (www.theguardian.com/books).

Jacket Copy (www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy). The books blog of the Los Angeles Times.

Jane Friedman’s blog (janefriedman.com/blog/). Commentary on writing and publishing from an astute industry observer.

KOK Edit Blog (editor-mom.blogspot.com/). A blog by the host of the Copyeditors’ Knowledge Base (see under Miscellaneous Online Resources).

Literary Hub (www.lithub.com).

The Millions (www.themillions.com/).

New York Times books page (www.nytimes.com/section/books). Includes not just the Times Book Review but also its other coverage of authors and publishing.

Page-Turner (www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner). The New Yorker’s books blog.

Publishers Marketplace (www.publishersmarketplace.com). Publishers Lunch (see below) is the indispensable industry newsletter; its site Publisher Marketplace aggregates publishing news from multiple sources, plus other useful tools including job listings; a directory of industry contacts; databases of book deals and reviews; and multiple best-seller lists.

Publishing Trends and its sister blog, Publishing Trendsetter (www.publishingtrends.com, www.publishingtrendsetter.com). Like Publishers Marketplace, this blog is the online counterpart to a key industry newsletter.

Scholarly Kitchen (scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/). Blog for the Society for Scholarly Publishing.

The Shatzkin Files (www.idealog.com/). Provocative commentary on publishing from a longtime industry consultant and observer.





EMAIL NEWSLETTERS


Copyediting (www.copyediting.com/publications/newsletter/).

Digital Speed (janefriedman.com/free-newsletter/). Digital media tools and resources.

GalleyCat (www.adweek.com/galleycat/).

Publishers Lunch (lunch.publishersmarketplace.com/). Breaking news and occasional commentary; along with Publishers Weekly, the most-read news source in the industry.

Publishing Perspectives (publishingperspectives.com/). International publishing news.

PW Daily (www.publishersweekly.com). Daily news update from Publishers Weekly.

Shelf Awareness (www.shelf-awareness.com/booktrade.html). Originally aimed at booksellers, news of books and publishing with a focus on retail.





MISCELLANEOUS ONLINE RESOURCES


AAUP Handbook: Best Practices in Peer Review (www.aaupnet.org/resources/for-members/handbooks-and-toolkits/peer-review-best-practices).

Board of Editors in the Life Sciences website (www.bels.org/).

“Book Publishing Accounting: Some Basic Concepts” by Thomas McCormack (aaupwiki.princeton.edu/index.php/Book_Publishing_Accounting:_Some_Basic_Concepts). A very concise introduction to what publishing people need to know about finances.

The Chicago Manual of Style Online (www.chicagomanualofstyle.org). Online version of the key style reference cited above.

Copyediting-L (www.copyediting-1.info). A listserv “for copyeditors and other defenders of the English language who want to discuss anything related to editing.” Its webpage also has a resource list.

Copyeditors’ Knowledge Base (www.kokedit.com/ckb.php). Information and links on freelance editing and copyediting.

Copyright and Fair Use site of Stanford University Libraries (fairuse.stanford.edu/). A comprehensive and useful resource for understanding copyright and fair use issues—a good first stop when permissions questions arise.

Literary Market Place / International Literary Market Place (www.literarymarketplace.com). American and international directories of publishers, agents, and other industry services.

Publishers Marketplace. See under Blogs and News Sites.





EDITING AND PUBLISHING COURSES


As with the resources above, this does not claim to be a complete list, as academic courses and programs are created and changed continually, but I hope it will offer a starting place for readers interested in further education in editing and publishing.—P.G.





SUMMER PUBLISHING COURSES


Columbia Publishing Course at Columbia School of Journalism

CUNY Publishing Institute at City University of New York School of Journalism

NYU Summer Publishing Institute at New York University School of Professional Studies

University of Denver Publishing Institute

Yale Publishing Course





COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITIES WITH PUBLISHING COURSES OR PROGRAMS


Arizona State University: graduate certificates in Nonfiction Writing and Publishing, Scholarly Publishing

Augsburg College: graduate MFA concentration in Publishing

Boston University: graduate programs in Editorial Studies

Drew University: graduate degrees in Book History and Print Culture

Drexel University: graduate and undergraduate programs in Publishing

Emerson College: graduate and undergraduate programs in Writing, Literature and Publishing

Fairfield University: graduate MFA concentration in Editing and Publishing

Florida State University: graduate programs in Publishing and Editing

George Washington University: MPS in Publishing

Hofstra University: undergraduate program in Publishing Studies

Lake Forest College: undergraduate minor in Print and Digital Publishing

New School: graduate program in Creative Publishing and Critical Journalism

New York University: MS in Publishing

Pace University: MS in Publishing

Portland State University: graduate program in Book Publishing

Rosemont College: MA in Publishing

Rowan University: graduate and undergraduate courses in publishing

Sarah Lawrence College: certificate in Book Publishing

Simon Fraser University: graduate and undergraduate programs in Publishing

University of Baltimore, Yale Gordon College of Arts and Sciences: MA in Publication Design

University of Houston-Victoria: MS in Publishing

University of Iowa: undergraduate Literary Publishing Track

University of North Carolina Wilmington: graduate and undergraduate programs in Publishing

University of Toronto: graduate programs in Book History and Print Culture; undergraduate program in Book and Media Studies





OTHER ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING ONLINE OR IN-PERSON EDITORIAL RESOURCES OR TRAINING


American Copy Editors Society

Bay Area Editors’ Forum

Council of Science Editors

Copyediting (www.copyediting.com)

Editcetera

Editorial Freelancers Association

Editorial Inspirations

The Graduate School (formerly known as the USDA Graduate School; (www.graduateschool.edu/content/ep-certificates/editorial)

New York University Center for Publishing Studies

Society for Technical Communication

University of California Berkeley Extension

University of California San Diego Extension

University of Chicago Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies

University of Washington Professional & Continuing Education





ABOUT THE EDITOR


Peter Ginna has worked as a book editor and publisher in New York since 1982. Most recently he was the founder and publisher and editorial director of Bloomsbury Press, an imprint of Bloomsbury USA. Prior to that he was editorial director for trade books at Oxford University Press and also worked at Crown / Random House, St. Martin’s Press, and Persea Books. He developed and taught the course “What Is an Editor” in NYU’s publishing program and has written about editorial matters for Creative Nonfiction magazine and the Nieman Foundation’s website, Storyboard. He blogs on books and publishing at www.DoctorSyntax.net and comments on Twitter: @DoctorSyntax.





INDEX


Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian (Alexie), 179

academic publishing, 6, 10, 21, 26, 40–42, 86; external reviews, 89; peer review process, 21, 24, 27. See also university presses

Academy of American Poets, 145

Ace Books, 166

acquiring editors, 9, 31, 69; developmental editing by, 85–88, 94–95; editorial assistants, 94, 233; freelancers, working with, 94; as gatekeepers, 17, 30, 71, 188, 228–29, 266–67; scouting of, 19–20; target audience, 95; team, working with, 94–95

acquisitions, 23–24, 74–75, 153, 271; agents, 8; contract negotiations, 28–29; curation, art of, 7; final phase of, 28–29; as financial investment, 21, 40, 47; handle, 25–26; luck, 41; marketing, as inextricable, 25; midlist acquisitions, 153; process of, 19–20; publisher’s list, identity of, 18; in publishing, as engine of, 17, 260; in reference publishing, 207–8; search engine optimization (SEO), 263; in textbook publishing, 49–50; in trade publishing, 30

Act like a Lady, Think like a Man (Harvey), 36

advances, 21–23, 27–29, 78, 87, 121–23, 142, 146, 153, 156, 208, 214, 236. See also royalties

agents, 8, 19, 43, 70–71, 77, 131, 138, 180; auctions, 27, 133; developmental process, 87–88; multiple submissions, 26; role of, 28

Alexie, Sherman, 143, 179

Alfred A. Knopf, 8

Alice (Goldberg), 20

All Creatures Great and Small (Herriot), 152

AMA Manual of Style, 113

Amazon, 4, 12, 74, 257–58, 261, 265–67, 269

Amazon Crossing, 262

Amazon Publishing, 262

American Copy Editors Society, 113

Amistad, 35–36

amplification, 262–63

Ancillary Justice (Leckie), 164

Anderson, Chris, 265

Anderson, Laurie Halse, 179

Angela’s Ashes (McCourt), 38

Annoying ABC, An (Bottner and Emberley), 183

Arnold, James R., 20

Asante, Molefi, 224

Associated Press Stylebook, 109, 113

auctions, 27, 29, 133, 180

audiobooks, 13

Autobiography of Malcolm X, The (Malcolm X), 191–92, 194

Avid Reader (Gottlieb), 8

Baldwin, James, 152, 224, 230

Bambara, Toni Cade, 224

Bantam Books, 36

Baraka, Amiri, 224

Barnes & Noble, 256

Barrows, Annie, 179

Barthes, Roland, 226

Bear Ate Your Sandwich, The (Sarcone-Roach), 183

Beautiful Struggle, The (Coates), 229

Beckett, Samuel, 143

Behind the Beautiful Forevers (Boo), 24–25

Bellevue, 272

Berg, Scott, 225

Between the World and Me (Coates), 229–30

Between You & Me (Norris), 175

Bhaskar, Michael, 262

Bibliocrunch, 268

Big Data, 91

Big Five, 141–42

Billy and Goat at the State Fair (Yaccarino), 181–82

biographies, 196; art of, 189–90; context, re-creating of, 190–91; documentation, 193–94; editing of, 187–88; honesty, 194; of living subjects, 194–95; sources, 191–93

BISAC codes, 259

Biss, Eula, 144–47

Black Lives Matter, 146

blogging, 3, 168

Bloomsbury, 18–19

Bluebook, 113

Board of Editors in the Life Sciences, 241n2

Body of Art, 218

Boogaard, Derek, 171

Boo, Katherine, 24

book proposals, 53, 60, 78–79; conceptualization, 77; filler, 81–82; revising of, 92; table of contents, 82–83, 92

book sales, 256; search engine optimization (SEO), role in, 257, 263

Bookscan, 27, 160

bookstores, 256–57, 259

Borders, 256

Borges, Jorge Luis, 143

Born to Run (Springsteen), 39

Bottner, Barbara, 183

Bourne Identity, The (Ludlum), 152

Boy on Ice (Branch), 171

Boynton, Sandra, 178

Branch, John, 171

Britain, 19

Britton, Greg, 21

Brokaw, Tom, 36

Bud, Not Buddy (Curtis), 179

Burr, Aaron, 191

“Business of Literature, The” (Nash), 268

Cameron, Ann, 179

Carson, Anne, 143

Caruso, Frank, 38–39

“Case for Reparations, The” (Coates), 229

Catcher in the Rye, The (Salinger), 120

Catch-22 (Heller), 37

Cat in the Hat (Dr. Seuss), 179

Céline, Louis-Ferdinand, 224

Charkin, Richard, 262

Charles Scribner’s Sons, 36, 119–21

Charlotte’s Web (White), 179

Chernow, Ron, 36

Chicago Manual of Style, The, 109–10, 113, 206

Child, Lee, 160, 164–65

children’s books, 6; board books, 178; chapter books, 179; editing of, 177–86; illustrations in, 182; leveled readers, 179; middle grade novels, 179, 184–86; picture books, 178–84; young adult novels, 179, 186

Cho, Zen, 165–66

Citizen: An American Lyric (Rankine), 146–47

City College Publishing Institute, 227

Clarke, Susannah, 166

Clark, John Henrik, 224

Clarkson Potter, 18

Clifton, Lucille, 143

Clinton, Bill, 191

CMG, 51

Coates, Ta-Nehisi, 229–30

Coffee House, 18, 142

Coffey, Michael, 157

Collins, Suzanne, 179

Columbia Publishing Course, 227

Columbia University, 4

commercial publishing, 3, 21

communications, 127–29

comp titles, 22, 25, 136, 263

conceptual editing, 8–9

conceptualization, 77–80

Connors, Philip, 172–73

Content Machine, The (Bhaskar), 262

“Context, Not Container” (O’Leary), 260–61

contracts, 41; acceptance clause, 78; negotiations of, 28–29, 53, 213

Cool Springs Press, 264

Copper Canyon, 142

copyediting, 7, 9, 12, 65–66, 97, 121, 253; accuracy, 110–11; anonymity of, 112–13; as career, 113–15; creative writing, 112; elegance, 111–12; logic, 111; rewriting, 112; spelling, grammar, and style, 108–10; structure, 111; tasks of, 106–12

Copyeditors’ Knowledge Base, 240

Council of Science Editors, 113, 243

Crewdson, Gregory, 215

crowdsourcing, 265

Crown Publishers, 18

curation, 7, 262–63, 271. See also filtering

Curtis, Christopher Paul, 179

Dalkey Archive, 142

database publishing, 6

David R. Godine, Publishing, 123

Davis, Dawn, 35–36

Davis, Miles, 172

Day, Sylvia, 262

Dead Witch Walking (Harrison), 162

Death and Life of the Great, The (Egan), 171

DeGeneres, Ellen, 20

DeLillo, Don, 36

Deliverance (Dickey), 99

Denneny, Michael, 24

desktop publishing, 257

developmental editing, 9, 12, 60–63, 87, 95, 112, 252–53; coaching, 88–89; as defined, 85; external reviews, 90; market research, 91; modeling, 88–89; series editors, 94

Dickey, James, 99

Dictionary of Untranslatables, 211

Didion, Joan, 226

diversity, 11, 223–30

Doerr, Anthony, 32

Don’t Let Me Be Lonely: An American Lyric (Rankine), 145

Don’t Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus (Willems), 179

Double Cup Love (Huang), 228

Doughten, Kevin, 191

e-books, 3–4, 6–7, 12–13, 60, 66–68, 215, 256–58, 266, 269

Edgar, Blake, 86–91, 94

editing, 121, 248–49; acquisitions, 7–8, 271; art of, 5; business of, 5; as career, 11; conceptual editing, 8–9; copyediting, 9; craft of, 5; developmental editing, 9; diversity, lack of, 11; future of, 270–72; as labor-intensive, 59; levels of, 9; line editing, 9; marginal comments, 169–70; as noble calling, 272; phases of, 7–11; problem-solving aspect of, 61; process of, 203; publishing decisions, 20–26; sales and marketing process, 67; as subjective process, 151; text development, 8, 271; transmittal manuscripts, 64–65. See also conceptual editing, copyediting, developmental editing, freelance editors, literary editing

editorial assistants, 4, 12, 55, 227, 236–37; duties of, 94, 231–32; manuscript tracking, 233–34; marketing, role in, 139; mentoring of, 152, 235; permissions log, 234; submissions, reading of, 233; tipsheets, 234; writing copy, 235

Editorial Freelancers Association, 113, 243–44

editors, 59, 96–97, 131, 133, 271–72; acquisitions, 17–18, 23–24, 153; art logs, 65; auctions, 133; author relationships, 9–10, 62–63, 70, 72–76, 88, 105, 155–56, 196, 272; books, audiences for, 24–26; communications, 127–29; comp titles, 22, 25, 136; as connectors, 3; contracts, negotiating of, 28–29; demonizing of, 4–5; empathy, 61; as entrepreneurs, 41; finance, 122–24; as gatekeepers, 17, 71, 188, 228–29, 266–67; general readers, 24–25; “great lost novel” theory, 71; intellectual property, acquiring of, 40–41; jacket and cover copy, 68; judgment, 61; knowledge, of publishing, 123; leadership of, 127–28; lists, managing of, 41, 123; as managers, 10, 119–30; marketing, 125–27, 156–57; market knowledge, 86; media exposure, 23; patience, 144; persuasion, 10; production, 124–25; qualities of, 61, 120–21; responsibilities of, 1, 3, 7, 86–87, 122, 124–30, 136–37; romanticizing of, 4–5; schedule, maintaining of, 67–68; selling, role of, 27; social media, 134, 139–40; spreading the word, 133–34, 137–40; strategy, 129–30; subject expertise, 86–87; taste, 61, 69, 71; tenacity and tact of, 86–87; tipsheets, 26, 67, 234; trust, 196; Typographic Oath, 114; value of, 268

Editors Canada/Réviseurs Canada, 241n2

Editors on Editing (Gross), 4

Egan, Dan, 171

Ellison, Ralph, 224

Emberley, Michael, 183

Engelhardt, Tom, 196

Entrekin, Morgan, 37

Epstein, Jason, 38

Essential Guide to Getting Your Book Published, The, 249

e-tailers, 12

Europe, 45

Evolution Shift (Houle), 265

Fallen Founder (Isenberg), 191

fan fiction, 265–66

Fanon, Frantz, 190

Farrar, Straus & Giroux (FSG), 18, 21

Fast Food Nation (Schlosser), 172

Faulkner, William, 120, 226

Feedly, 115

Feinstein, John, 185

50 Shades of Grey (James), 265–66

Filgate, Michele, 157

filtering, 262–63. See also curation

Fink, Sheri, 172

Fire Next Time, The (Baldwin), 230

Fire Season (Connors), 172

Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 75, 104, 119–20

Five Days at Memorial (Fink), 172

Flynn, Gillian, 160

For Dummies series, 36

Fox on Wheels (Marshall), 179

freelance editors, 7, 12, 86, 94, 247, 267–68; authors, working for, 244–46; background of, 239; business of, 240; certification exams, 241; as generalists, 240–41; finances, 242–43; marketing, 242; outsourcing, 243; packagers, 243; professional development, 243–44; publishers, working for, 244–45; reasons for, 238–40; as specialists, 240–41; work tools, 244

Fresh off the Boat (Huang), 228

Frog and Toad Are Friends (Lobel), 179

galleys, 2, 66

Garvey, Marcus, 190

general nonfiction, 169–70; clarity, importance of, 173–74; curve, achieving of, 174–76; as detailed, 171–72; draft manuscripts, 172–73; specificity of, 171; structure, 174–75

genre, 80–81; as defined, 159

genre fiction, 23, 159; acquiring of, 160–62; audiences, engaging with, 167–68; bloggers, 168; editing of, 162–65; horror, 162n1, 162–63; mysteries, 163, 167; as profitable, 160; romance, 162n1, 167; science fiction, 163, 167; series, primacy of, 162, 164; strong characters in, 164; world building, importance of, 162–63

Gillmor, Dan, 265

Ginsberg, Allen, 143

Giovanni, Nikki, 224

Giroux, Robert, 61

Godoff, Ann, 36

Goines, Donald, 224

Goldberg, Whoopi, 19–20

Golden Compass, The (Pullman), 179

Goodreads, 261

Gottlieb, Robert, 8, 37

G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 18, 28, 152

Grand Central Publishing, 121

Graywolf Press, 11, 18, 21, 142–46, 272

Greatest Generation, The (Brokaw), 36

Gross, Gerald, 4

Grove Press, 142

Hachette Book Group, 121

Haley, Alex, 191

Hammer Head: The Making of a Carpenter (MacLaughlin), 174

handle, 25–26, 71

Hardcastle (Yount), 152

Harding, Paul, 154–58

Harrison, Kim, 162

Harry N. Abrams, 215–16

Harvard University Press, 207

Harvey, Steve, 35–36

Hay House, 264

Hazlitt, William, 173

Heinlein, Robert E., 163

Heller, Joseph, 224

Hellman, Eric, 266

Hemingway, Ernest, 119–20

Herriot, James, 152

Hesse, Hermann, 224

Hiaasen, Carl, 184

Hillenbrand, Laura, 38

Hoban, Tana, 178

Hoffman, Alice, 235

Holloway House, 224

Hooper, Niels, 86–87, 90–93, 95

Hoot (Hiaasen), 184

Houle, David, 265

House (Kidder), 174

How I Survived Being a Girl (Van Draanen), 185

Huang, Eddie, 228

Hunger Games, The (Collins), 179

I Am a Bunny (Risom), 178

Iceberg Slim, 224

IDG Books Worldwide, 36

illustrated books, 214, 216; contract negotiations, 213; designer, importance of, 217; digital marketplace, effect on, 215; images, reproducing of, 218–19; rights problems, 218

independent publishers, 10–11, 141–44, 146–47, 153, 243; house mission, 21. See also self-publishing

Irving, John, 39

Isaacson, Walter, 36

Isenberg, Nancy, 191

Ivy & Bean books, 179

Jackson, Andrew, 193

Jackson, Richard, 180, 186

James, E. L., 265

James, Marlon, 228, 235

JellyBooks, 267

Jonathan Strange and Mr. Norrell (Clarke), 166

Jungle of Snakes: A Century of Counterinsurgency Warfare from the Philippines to Iraq (Arnold), 20

juvenile publishing. See children’s books

Kadrey, Richard, 165

Keats, Ezra Jack, 179

Keats, John, 151

Kidder, Tracy, 174

Kilcullen, John, 36

Kindle, 257–58, 267, 269

Kindle Worlds, 265

King, Martin Luther Jr., 190

Kitten Tale, A (Rohmann), 182

launch presentations, 134–36

LeBlanc, Adrian Nicole, 172

Leckie, Ann, 164

Lee, Harper, 73

legal vetting, 64

Less than Zero (Ellis), 37

libel, 64, 193

Liberation Books, 224

Library Thing, 261

line editing, 9, 12, 62–63, 96–98, 103–5, 253; macro editing, 100–102; micro editing, 99; mid-micro editing, 99–100; serial resolution, 100; transitions, 101–2

Lish, Gordon, 105

literary editing, 144; literature in translation, 156

literary writing, 3, 151, 153–56

Little, Brown and Company, 121

Little, Brown Books for Young Readers, 121

Lizzi, Marian, 133, 135–36

Lobel, Arnold, 179

Londoners (Taylor), 175

Long Way Gone, A (Beah), 25

Loomis, Gloria, 229

Lorde, Audre, 224

Lowenstein, Jerome, 153

Ludlum, Robert, 152

MacLaughlin, Nina, 174

Macmillan: Heroes & Heartbreakers imprint, 264

Madans, Phil, 259

Magic Tree House books, 179

Malcolm X, 189–91, 194

Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention (Manning), 189

managing editors, 107. See also production editors

Manutius, Aldus, 270–71

Marable, Manning, 189, 191, 194

Marek, Richard, 152–53

marketing, 125–27, 156; acquisitions, 23, 25; direct to consumer, 263–64; editorial assistants, role in, 139; as editorial responsibility, 10; freelance editors, 242; in publishing, 22–23, 25, 261–64; in publishing process, 67; search engine optimization (SEO), 257; in self-publishing, 261–62; traditional media, 269; word of mouth, 157

Marshall, Edward, 179

Marshall, James, 179

Martin, George R. R., 163

Martin, Trayvon, 229

mass market publishing, 6

Maximum City (Mehta), 25

Max Perkins: Editor of Genius (Berg), 119–20, 225

Mayhew, Alice, 36

McCarthy, Peter, 261

McCormack, Thomas, 18, 100, 104, 152

McCracken, Elizabeth, 157

McGrory, Mary, 190

McIllroy, Thad, 258

McLean, Sarah, 163

McSweeney’s, 142

Medina, Kate, 36

memoirs, 196; emotional honesty, 195

metadata, 25, 124, 259–61

Meyer, Sheldon, 28

Meyer, Stephenie, 265

Midwife’s Tale, A (Ulrich), 188

Milkweed, 142

Moby-Dick (Melville), 120

Moo Baa La La La (Boynton), 178

Morrison, Toni, 224

Mullen, Harryette, 143

Nash, Richard, 268

National Book Critics Circle Award, 145–46

Netvibes, 115

New Directions, 142

New Jim Crow, The (Alexander), 19

New Press, 19

New Yorker (magazine), 8, 175–76

New York University, 4

Ngugi, Thiong’o wa, 226

Nin, Anaïs, 226

nonfiction: collaboration in, 265; core idea, 61; proposals for, 189

Norris, Mary, 175–76

Notebook, The (Sparks), 33

Notes from No Man’s Land (Biss), 145

Novik, Naomi, 166

“Ode on a Grecian Urn” (Keats), 151

O’Hara, Frank, 143

Old Man’s War (Scalzi), 163

O’Leary, Brian, 260

100 Essays I Don’t Have Time to Write (Ruhl), 172

On Immunity: An Inoculation (Biss), 145–47

online publishing, 7

O’Reilly Media, 264

Osborne, Mary Pope, 179

Outlaw Pete (Springsteen and Caruso), 38–39

Oxford Classical Dictionary, 206

Oxford University Press, 28, 91–92

page proofs, 66–67

Paragon House, 223–25

pencil editing. See text development

Penguin Random House, 3; One World imprint, 12

Perkins, Maxwell, 70, 73, 75, 105, 119–20, 123, 223

permissions, 63; legal vetting, 64

Perseus Books, 121

Phaidon, 218

Pimp (Iceberg Slim), 224

Place of My Own, A (Pollan), 174

platform, 22–23, 25

Pollan, Michael, 174

Price of the Ticket, The (Baldwin), 152

Princeton Companion to Mathematics, The, 206

Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, The, 211

print on demand, 7

production editors, 107. See also managing editors

profit-and-loss worksheet (P&L), 22, 47, 123

proofreading, 12, 66, 112–15, 253–54

publication, 10–11

Publishers Row, 1, 3, 7, 270

publishing, 2, 10, 59, 127–28, 271; acquisitions, as engine of, 17, 260; advances, 21–22; as affair of heart, 83; alternative models of, 262–67; amplification, 262–63; apprenticeship system, 4, 12; atomization of, 258; authors, proving value to, 262; books, as unstable category, 270; changes in, 3, 153, 256–69; cognitive surplus, 258; collaborative models, 264–65; context, importance of, 260–61; “crash” books, 67; digital media, 262; digitization of, 262; diversity in, 11, 223–30; fan fiction, 265–66; filtering, 262–63; forking stories, 267; gentility, tradition of, 29; house mission, 21; hyperliterature, 267; marketing strategies, 22–23, 25, 261–64; metadata, 25, 124, 259–61; plagiarism, 193; process of, 60, 131–32; publishing classes, 4; readers, direct relationships with, 263–66; snobbery, 11; technology, effect on, 3, 13; tipsheets, 26, 67, 234; titles, increase in, 257–58; training in, 4; trust, building of, 139; value of, 262; verticalization, 264; as volatile, 151

Pullman, Philip, 179–80, 185

Raab, Jamie, 33

Rabinowitz, Jonathan, 155

Raccah, Dominique, 265

racism, 11–12

Radcliffe Publishing Procedures Course, 49

Random Family (LeBlanc), 172

Random House, 24, 36, 152; One World imprint, 230; Suvudu imprint, 264

Random House UK: Black Crown project, 267

Rankine, Claudia, 144–47

Ratner, Vaddey, 235

reading: as social activity, 264–65

Reed, Ishmael, 224

Reedsy, 243, 268

reference publishing, 6, 10; acquisition process in, 207–8; budgets, 207–8; contemporary versions of, 206–7; content, 205–6; contributors, 209–10; development of, 209–10; digital form of, 205–6; production, 210–11; publication of, 211–12; team, choosing of, 208–9

Reidy, Carolyn, 38

Reiser, Paul, 20

Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide, 207

Restivo-Alessi, Chantal, 263

Revolutionary Road (Yates), 152

Rich, Motoko, 158

Rimbaud, Arthur, 226

Risom, Ole, 178

Robinson, Marilynne, 157

Rockefeller, John D., 36

Rodale, 264

Roessner, Maura, 86–93, 95

Rohmann, Eric, 182

Roth, Henry, 105

Rowling, J. K., 18

royalties, 21–23, 28–29, 53, 121–23, 236. See also advances

royalty schedules, 21

Rucci, Marysue, 37–38

Ruhl, Sarah, 172

Sale, Faith, 28

Sanchez, Sonia, 224

Sandman Slim (Kadrey), 165

Sante, Luc, 226

Sarabande, 142

Sarcone-Roach, Julia, 183

Scalzi, John, 163

Scarry, Richard, 178

Schild, Ronald, 259

Schlosser, Eric, 172

Schneider, Naomi, 86, 88–89, 92–95

scholarly editors, 40, 48; authors, finding of, 42–43; commercial viability, 41–42; commissioning of work, 44–45; crossover books, 199; do no harm motto, 197; dual bottom line of, 41–42; editorial intervention, determining of, 198–203; merit, 41; monographs, 19–20, 44, 199; profit-and-loss (P&L) statement, 47; as strategic, 44

scholarly publishing, 41–42, 197, 204; books, as collective efforts, 48; introductions, 200, 202; literary agents, 43; magnum opus, 201–2; microhistory, 201; peer review, 45–47, 203

Schuster, Max, 55

Scientific Style and Format, 113

Scribd, 267

Seabiscuit (Hillenbrand), 38

search engine optimization (SEO), 257, 263

Seinfeld, Jerry, 20

Selby, Todd, 217

self-publishing, 3–7, 9, 12, 255, 258, 269–71; beta readers, 249–50, 251, 267; bidding services, 243; collaboration, 264; copyediting, 253; criticism, taking of, 254; developmental editing, 252–53; digital media, 262; editing, 248–49; line editing, 253; marketing strategies, 261–62; outside editors, 251–52; prices, setting of, 261; professional readers, 251; proofreading, 253–54; self-editing, 249; writers’ groups, 249–50. See also independent publishers

semantic analysis: core concept, 259

Sendak, Maurice, 179

Seuss, Dr., 179

Shatzkin, Mike, 258

Sherman, Rob, 267

Shirky, Clay, 258

Simon & Schuster, 8, 36–39, 55, 120

Simonoff, Meredith Kaffel, 138

Singer, Isaac Bashevis, 177–78

Sinkler, Rebecca, 157–58

Small Business Administration (SBA), 240

small presses, 21

Snowy Day, The (Keats), 179

social media, 4, 74, 259

Sorcerer to the Crown (Cho), 165–67

Sourcebooks: crowdsourcing, 265

Speak (Anderson), 179

Springsteen, Bruce, 38–39

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 206

Starship Troopers (Heinlein), 163

Stein, Bob, 264–65, 267

Stephen, Leslie, 193

St. Martin’s Press, 152

Stories Julian Tells, The (Cameron), 179

Sun Myung Moon, 225–26

SurveyMonkey, 91

Tartt, Donna, 32

Tasman, Alice, 133

Taylor, Craig, 175

Terkel, Studs, 175

textbook acquisitions, 49–50; Common Core standards, 51; market, knowledge of, 51–52

textbook publishing, 6, 20, 26, 50, 86; characteristics of, 51–52; contracts, negotiating of, 53; developmental reviews, 8, 53–54, 271; market research, 90; production, 54; proposals, 53; sales reps, 52–53, 55

text development, 8–10

Thomas, Matthew, 37–38

Thompson, Hunter, 226

Tinkers (Harding), 154–57

To Kill a Mockingbird (Lee), 73, 120

trade book acquisitions, 30; assumptions of, 31; audiences, 35–36; authority, of author, 32; hot topics, 37; objective of, 31; personal impulse, 39; rules of, 32–38; sequels, 34; target audience, 31; the “tell,” 35

trade publishing, 4–10, 18, 24, 26, 43, 52, 86–88, 131

transmittal manuscripts, 64–65

Tranströmer, Tomas, 147

Turtle Point Press, 155

Tutuola, Amos, 226

Twilight (Meyer), 265

Typographic Oath, 114

Ulrich, Laurel, 188

Unification Church, 225–26

University of Chicago Press, 110, 114

University of Denver, 4

university presses, 3, 6, 18, 20. See also academic publishing

United States, 45, 257, 262; retail book sales in, 256

Unsworth, Barry, 157

Upwork, 243

Van Draanen, Wendelin, 185

verticalization, 264

Vonnegut, Kurt, 224

Waldman, Jonathan, 31

Wattpad, 265–66

We Are Not Ourselves (Thomas), 37–38

Webster, Noah, 176

Weil, Robert, 105

Weisbach, Rob, 19–20

Where the Wild Things Are (Sendak), 179

White, E. B., 179

Willems, Mo, 179

William Morris Agency, 29

Wolfe, Thomas, 105, 119

Wright, Richard, 224

Yaccarino, Dan, 181–82

Yanique, Tiphanie, 235

Yates, Richard, 152

Yount, John, 152

Zinn, Howard, 143

Ziv, Maya, 138–39





FOOTNOTES



INTRODUCTION


1. The word is used in shorthand to refer to first-pass proofs, bound galleys, and advance reading copies, three related but quite distinct items—none of which matches the term’s original meaning (see the glossary for definitions of each).



2. Our British colleagues might reply in self-defense that they say “typescripts”—but that term is only marginally less obsolete.



3. A more complete list of these programs can be found within the resource list at the end of this book.



4. The resource list also includes the titles of other useful reading material, in print and online.





CHAPTER 1


1. As explained in the introduction, some editors have no acquisitions responsibility. But for all editors whose job descriptions include acquisitions, that role will typically be considered their most valuable one.



2. McCormack cites the scene (and acknowledges slightly misquoting the script) in his insightful book The Fiction Editor, the Novelist, and the Novel (Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2006), 160.





CHAPTER 2


* JONATHAN KARP began his publishing career in 1989 at Random House, rising from editorial assistant to editor in chief over the course of sixteen years. Since then, he has worked at the Hachette Book Group as the founding publisher and editor-in-chief of Twelve, and at Simon & Schuster as president and publisher of the company’s flagship imprint. His writing has been published in the New York Times Magazine, the American Scholar, GQ, Slate, and the Washington Post.





CHAPTER 3


* GREGORY M. BRITTON is editorial director of Johns Hopkins University Press, where he oversees the publishing of the press’s 170 new books annually. He also acquires its list in higher education studies. Greg serves on the management team that oversees the press’s substantial book and journal programs, distribution service, and Project Muse. Prior to his appointment at Hopkins, Britton directed Getty Publications at the J. Paul Getty Trust, the largest museum publishing program in America. He is active in both the Association of American Publishers and the Association of American University Presses, which presented to him its 2016 Constituency Award.



1. An excellent resource on the practice of peer review is the AAUP’s Best Practices for Peer Review, http://www.aaupnet.org/policy-areas/peer-review.





CHAPTER 4


* PETER COVENEY has spent over forty years in college publishing, most recently as executive editor for history at John Wiley & Sons. Previously he worked as executive editor for history at Blackwell; senior editor at Oxford University Press, M. E. Sharpe, Greenwood/Praeger, and Paragon House; editor and marketing manager at Harper & Row; managing editor at Holt, Rinehart & Winston / Dryden Press; and production manager at Northern Illinois University Press. He has spoken at seminars and courses at several universities and is the author of nearly two dozen articles and reviews on book collecting, publishing, design, and production.



1. M. Lincoln Schuster, “An Open Letter to a Would-Be Editor,” in Editors on Editing, ed. Gerald Gross, 3rd ed. (New York: Grove, 1993), 28.





CHAPTER 5


* NANCY S. MILLER is associate publisher and editorial director of the adult trade division of Bloomsbury Publishing, where she works with such authors as Gail Godwin, Mark Kurlansky, Roz Chast, Daniel Handler, and James Hansen. She started her career at Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, as assistant editor to the legendary Robert Giroux, and has also held editorial positions at Washington Square Press and Pocket Books at Simon & Schuster; Ballantine, where she was editor-in-chief; Random House; and HarperCollins. She is a member of the Freedom to Read Committee of the Association of American Publishers.



1. Robert Giroux, The Education of an Editor (New York: R. R. Bowker, 1982), 11.





CHAPTER 6


* BETSY LERNER is the author of The Forest for the Trees: An Editor’s Advice to Writers, Food and Loathing: A Lament, and The Bridge Ladies. Her blog on the agony of the writing life is www.betsylerner.com.





CHAPTER 7


* SUSAN RABINER cofounded Susan Rabiner Literary with Alfred Fortunato, with whom she cowrote Thinking like Your Editor: How to Write Great Serious Nonfiction—and Get It Published. Previously she was senior editor at a number of major New York publishing houses and editorial director of Basic Books. Authors represented by her agency have won numerous awards, including two Pulitzer Prizes.





CHAPTER 8


* SCOTT NORTON is director of Editing, Design, and Production at the University of California Press, where he has been on staff since 1995. He is the author of Developmental Editing: A Handbook for Freelancers, Authors, and Publishers and a contributor to Beth Luey, ed., Revising Your Dissertation: Advice from Leading Editors. He currently serves as president of the Publishing Professionals Network, which hosts, among other activities, an annual daylong conference for book-publishing staff and freelancers.



1. Scott Norton, Developmental Editing: A Handbook for Freelancers, Authors, and Publishers (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).



2. Beth Luey, ed., Revising Your Dissertation: Advice from Leading Editors (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004).





CHAPTER 9


* GEORGE WITTE has worked at St. Martin’s Press for thirty-two years as an editor of fiction and nonfiction books, publisher of Picador USA, and for the past sixteen years editor in chief. He also is the author of three collections of poems: The Apparitioners, Deniability, and Does She Have a Name? He lives with his family in New Jersey.





CHAPTER 10


* CAROL FISHER SALLER is the longtime editor of the Chicago Manual of Style’s online Q&A and was chief copyeditor for the 16th edition of the Manual. She also writes the Editor’s Corner feature for the CMOS Shop Talk blog and is the author of The Subversive Copy Editor: Advice from Chicago (or, How to Negotiate Good Relationships with Your Writers, Your Colleagues, and Yourself) as well as the young adult novel Eddie’s War. She is online at @SubvCopyEd and http://www.subversivecopyeditor.com.



1. Production editor is also sometimes used for a manager in a production department who does not copyedit at all but gets bids from typesetters and printers and paper vendors, sets typesetting and printing schedules, and monitors the quality of the physical product.





CHAPTER 11


* MICHAEL PIETSCH is CEO of Hachette Book Group and has worked as an editor for decades. He’s had the great fortune to work with superb writers including the novelists Mark Childress, Michael Connelly, David James Duncan, Michael Koryta, Mark Leyner, Rick Moody, Walter Mosley, James Patterson, George Pelecanos, Anita Shreve, Donna Tartt, David Foster Wallace, and Stephen Wright, and the nonfiction writers John Feinstein, Peter Guralnick, Keith Richards, Stacy Schiff, and David Sedaris. A career highlight was editing a posthumous memoir by Ernest Hemingway, The Dangerous Summer. Twitter: @wordfellow.





CHAPTER 12


* CALVERT D. MORGAN JR. is vice president and executive editor at Riverhead Books, an imprint of Penguin Random House, and also the board chair of the Center for Fiction. He has been an editor and publisher in New York since 1988, most recently as executive editor at Harper and editorial director at Harper Perennial, two imprints of HarperCollins Publishers. He has worked with authors including Jess Walter, Roxane Gay, Lidia Yuknavitch, Lauren Redniss, Molly Crabapple, Elizabeth Tallent, Kate Zambreno, Blake Butler, Tom Piazza, Porochista Khakpour, Stanley Crouch, and James Herriot. A graduate of Yale University, he lives in Pelham, NY.





CHAPTER 13


* JEFF SHOTTS is executive editor at Graywolf Press, an independent literary publisher, where for twenty years he has acquired and edited poetry, essays, literary criticism, and other nonfiction titles. He has worked with many award-winning writers, including Elizabeth Alexander, Mary Jo Bang, Eula Biss, Mark Doty, Nick Flynn, Leslie Jamison, D. A. Powell, Claudia Rankine, Vijay Seshadri, Tracy K. Smith, Susan Stewart, Mary Szybist, Natasha Trethewey, and Kevin Young. Shotts received the 2017 Editor’s Award from Poets & Writers. He lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and on Twitter he’s @JeffShotts1.





CHAPTER 14


* ERIKA GOLDMAN is publisher and editorial director of Bellevue Literary Press (BLP), a nonprofit mission-driven publisher that has been publishing literary fiction and nonfiction at the intersection of the arts and the sciences since 2007. BLP’s books have received major literary prizes: The Sojourn by Andrew Krivak was a 2011 National Book Award finalist and 2012 winner of the first annual Chautauqua Prize and Dayton Literary Peace Prize; The Jump Artist by Austin Ratner won the 2011 Sami Rohr Prize for Jewish Literature; and the New York Times bestseller Tinkers, by Paul Harding, received the 2010 Pulitzer Prize.



1. Two excellent histories of the twentieth-century publishing business: Jason Epstein’s Book Business (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001); Andre Schiffrin’s The Business of Books: How the International Conglomerates Took Over Publishing and Changed the Way We Read (New York: Verso, 2000).



2. Motoko Rich, “Mr. Cinderella: From Rejection Notes to the Pulitzer,” New York Times, April 18, 2010.





CHAPTER 15


* DIANA GILL is an executive editor at Tor/Forge/Tor Teen. Prior to Tor she was at Ace/Roc and HarperCollins, where she ran Harper Voyager for twelve years. Some of the many bestselling and award-winning authors she has worked with include Charlaine Harris, Kim Harrison, Richard Kadrey, Mark Lawrence, Zen Cho, Genevieve Cogman, Alastair Reynolds, and Brom. She also teaches at New York University and is a University of Chicago alumna. Twitter: @dianagill. Instagram: dianacgill.



1. Horror is distinct in that its works are often as much stand-alones as series, in part because horror can and does move fluidly into other genres (even romance, such as urban fantasy / paranormal romance, where traditionally terrorizing creatures like vampires and werewolves became romantic).



2. David Vinjamuri, “The Strongest Brand in Publishing,” Forbes, March 4, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/davidvinjamuri/2014/03/04/the-strongest-brand-in-publishing-is/.





CHAPTER 16


* MATT WEILAND is a vice president and senior editor at W. W. Norton. He has worked at Ecco Books, Granta Books, and Columbia University Press, as well as on The Paris Review, Granta, and the Baffler. He also served as project director for the documentary radio unit American RadioWorks. Weiland is the coeditor, with Sean Wilsey, of the bestselling State by State: A Panoramic Portrait of America, and his writing has appeared in the New York Times Book Review, the Washington Post, New York Magazine, Bookforum, Slate, and elsewhere. Originally from Minneapolis, he lives in Brooklyn with his wife and son. Twitter: @mattweiland.





CHAPTER 17


* NANCY SISCOE is a senior executive editor with Knopf Books for Young Readers, where she’s worked for the past twenty years. Nancy’s list includes New York Times bestsellers and award-winning titles from picture books to YA. Authors she works with include Carl Hiaasen, Jerry Spinelli, Philip Pullman, Cynthia Voigt, Wendelin Van Draanen, and Julia Sarcone-Roach. She is on Facebook, on Twitter at @siscoe_nancy, and on Instagram at nsiscoe.





CHAPTER 18


* WENDY WOLF is associate publisher at Viking, where she edits biography, history, science, politics, and other nonfiction. She was previously an editor at HarperCollins, and Pantheon Books before that. Her authors include Manning Marable, Nathaniel Philbrick, Nancy Isenberg, Steven Pinker, Jared Diamond, Blanche Wiesen Cook, Rebecca Eaton, Lynne Cheney, John Norris, Stacy Cordery, Allen Shawn, June Cross, Linda Greenwald, Jenifer Ringer, and Daniel James Brown.





CHAPTER 19


* SUSAN FERBER is executive editor for American and world history at Oxford University Press USA. Her list includes academic and trade titles, by both junior and senior scholars, on topics ranging from ancient history to contemporary history. Books she has edited have won numerous history awards, including the Pulitzer Prize and Bancroft Prize, and five have become national bestsellers. She also teaches at the Columbia Publishing Course and speaks to audiences regularly about academic book publishing. She has written for a variety of publications, including The Chronicle of Higher Education, Passport, and Perspectives on History.





CHAPTER 20


* ANNE SAVARESE is executive editor for literary studies at Princeton University Press, where for ten years she acquired and developed reference books, among them a winner of the Dartmouth Medal, The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism by Donald Lopez and Robert Buswell, and seven Choice Outstanding Academic Titles, including The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics, fourth edition, edited by Roland Greene and Stephen Cushman, and The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought, edited by Gerhard Bowering. Previously she was a reference editor at Oxford University Press and Facts On File, and a trade editor at St. Martin’s Press.





CHAPTER 21


* DEB AARONSON is vice president, group publisher at Phaidon. She is responsible for Phaidon’s art, photography, fashion, general interest, and children’s publishing programs, as well as overseeing the design department. She came to Phaidon from Abrams, where she served as publisher for the adult trade group.





CHAPTER 22


* CHRIS JACKSON is vice president, publisher, and editor in chief of the One World imprint at Penguin Random House. Previously he was executive editor at Spiegel & Grau. He has worked with authors including Ta-Nehisi Coates, Wes Moore, Trevor Noah, Matt Taibbi, Bryan Stevenson, Jill Leovy, Victor LaValle, and Jay Z.



1. This essay originated as a talk given to the Association of American University Presses at its annual meeting in June 2016 and has been expanded and adapted for this collection.





CHAPTER 23


* KATIE HENDERSON ADAMS is an editor of literary fiction and nonfiction at Liveright, a division of W. W. Norton. She lives in Manhattan with her husband and two young sons. Twitter: @KatieANYC.





CHAPTER 24


* KATHARINE O’MOORE-KLOPF is a self-employed medical editor specializing in editing journal manuscripts written by nonnative speakers of English. Her editing has helped researchers in more than twenty nations get published in more than fifty different medical journals. She owns KOK Edit, at www.kokedit.com. She is the owner of the email discussion list Copyediting-L, at www.copyediting-1.info. She blogs at EditorMom, at http://editor-mom.blogspot.com. On Twitter, she is @KOKEdit. You can find her on LinkedIn at www.linkedin.com/in/KOKEdit, and on Facebook at www.facebook.com/K.OMooreKlopf.



1. For more specific guidance on many of the topics covered in this essay, see the relevant postings in the Copyeditors’ Knowledge Base, http://www.kokedit.com/ckb.php; on my blog, http://editor-mom.blogspot.com; and in the Copyediting newsletter and its blog, http://www.copyediting.com.



2. The certification offered by the Board of Editors in the Life Sciences helps authors and publishers find practitioners with the needed expertise. Meanwhile, Editors Canada / Réviseurs Canada offers five professional credentials for editors who can pass its exams: in proofreading, copyediting, stylistic editing, structural editing, and one that encompasses the other four areas.





CHAPTER 25


* ARIELLE ECKSTUT and DAVID HENRY STERRY are cofounders of the Book Doctors, a company that has helped hundreds of authors get their books published. They are also coauthors of The Essential Guide to Getting Your Book Published. Arielle has been a literary agent for over twenty years at the Levine Greenberg Rostan Literary Agency. She is also the author of nine books and the cofounder of the iconic brand LittleMissMatched. David is the best-selling author of sixteen books. His first book was translated into ten languages and optioned by HBO, and his latest book was featured on the cover of the Sunday New York Times Book Review.





CHAPTER 26


* JANE FRIEDMAN has twenty years of experience in the publishing industry, with expertise in digital media strategy for authors and publishers. In addition to being a columnist with Publisher’s Weekly and a professor with the Great Courses, Jane maintains an award-winning blog on writing and publishing at JaneFriedman.com. She’s spoken on the digital era of authorship at events such as BookExpo America, Frankfurt Book Fair, and Digital Book World, among many others.



1. “Online Retailers Gained, While Brick-and-Mortar Lost In Wake of Borders Exit,” press release. Bowker, August 6, 2013. http://www.bowker.com/news/2013/Online-Retailers-Gained-While-Brick-and-Mortar-Lost-In-Wake-of-Borders-Exit.html.



2. Michael Cader, “Back to the Basics at Barnes: What’s Been Lost in the eBook Era?,” Publishers Marketplace, July 2, 2015. http://lunch.publishersmarketplace.com/2015/07/back-to-the-basics-at-barnes-whats-been-lost-in-the-ebook-era/.



3. Mike Shatzkin, “The Reality of Publishing Economics Has Changed for the Big Players,” The Shatzkin Files, Idea Logical, September 19, 2016, http://www.idealog.com/blog/reality-publishing-economics-changed-big-players/.



4. Jason Del Rey, “Amazon’s Complete Retail Domination in One Tiny Chart,” Re/Code, December 23, 2015, http://recode.net/2015/12/23/amazons-complete-retail-domination-in-one-tiny-chart/.



5. “Self-Publishing Sees Triple-Digit Growth in Just Five Years, Says Bowker,” press release, Bowker, October 24, 2012, http://www.bowker.com/news/2012/Self-Publishing-Sees-Triple-Digit-Growth-in-Just-Five-Years-Says-Bowker.html.



6. Mike Shatzkin, “Atomization: Publishing as a Function Rather than an Industry, The Shatzkin Files, Idea Logical, March 19, 2013, http://www.idealog.com/blog/atomization-publishing-as-a-function-rather-than-an-industry.



7. Andre Brett and David Walter, “White Paper: The Link between Metadata and Sales,” Nielsen, January 25, 2012, http://www.isbn.nielsenbook.co.uk/uploads/3971_Nielsen_Metadata_white_paper_A4(3).pdf.



8. Brian O’Leary, “Context, Not Container,” in Book: A Futurist’s Manifesto (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2012).



9. Eric Hellman, “In 2013, eBook Sales Collapsed . . . in My Household,” Go to Hellman, January 1, 2014, http://go-to-hellman.blogspot.com/2014/01/in-2013-ebook-sales-collapsed-in-my.html.



10. Rob Sherman, in Rob Sherman and Dan Franklin, “Something Wicked This Way A) Comes B) Lurks,” interview by Anthony John Agnello, Gameological Society, July 30, 2013, http://gameological.com/2013/07/interview-black-crown-project/.